<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn051-Kandarakasutta  - With Kandaraka </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Kandarakasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">With Kandaraka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 51  - Middle Discourses 51 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā campāyaṃ viharati gaggarāya pokkharaṇiyā tīre mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho pesso ca hatthārohaputto kandarako ca paribbājako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā pesso hatthārohaputto bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Pessa the elephant driver’s son and Kandaraka the wanderer went to see the Buddha. When they had approached, Pessa bowed and sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kandarako pana paribbājako bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the wanderer Kandaraka exchanged greetings with the Buddha and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho kandarako paribbājako tuṇhībhūtaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ bhikkhusaṃghaṃ anuviloketvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He looked around the mendicant Saṅgha, who were so very silent, and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ, bho gotama, abbhutaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, Master Gotama, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvañcidaṃ bhotā gotamena sammā bhikkhusaṃgho paṭipādito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How the mendicant Saṅgha has been led to practice properly by Master Gotama! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, bho gotama, ahesuṃ atītamaddhānaṃ arahanto sammāsambuddhā tepi bhagavanto etaparamaṃyeva sammā bhikkhusaṃghaṃ paṭipādesuṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">All the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas in the past or the future who lead the mendicant Saṅgha to practice properly will at best do so </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi etarahi bhotā gotamena sammā bhikkhusaṃgho paṭipādito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like Master Gotama does in the present.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, bho gotama, bhavissanti anāgatamaddhānaṃ arahanto sammāsambuddhā tepi bhagavanto etaparamaṃyeva sammā bhikkhusaṃghaṃ paṭipādessanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi etarahi bhotā gotamena sammā bhikkhusaṃgho paṭipādito”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, kandaraka, evametaṃ, kandaraka. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, Kandaraka! That’s so true! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, kandaraka, ahesuṃ atītamaddhānaṃ arahanto sammāsambuddhā tepi bhagavanto etaparamaṃyeva sammā bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paṭipādesuṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">All the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas in the past or the future who lead the mendicant Saṅgha to practice properly will at best do so </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi etarahi mayā sammā bhikkhusaṅgho paṭipādito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like I do in the present. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, kandaraka, bhavissanti anāgatamaddhānaṃ arahanto sammāsambuddhā tepi bhagavanto etaparamaṃyeva sammā bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paṭipādessanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi etarahi mayā sammā bhikkhusaṅgho paṭipādito. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi hi, kandaraka, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṃghe arahanto khīṇāsavā vusitavanto katakaraṇīyā ohitabhārā anuppattasadatthā parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojanā sammadaññāvimuttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For in this mendicant Saṅgha there are perfected mendicants, who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and are rightly freed through enlightenment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi hi, kandaraka, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṃghe sekkhā santatasīlā santatavuttino nipakā nipakavuttino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And in this mendicant Saṅgha there are trainee mendicants who are consistently ethical, living consistently, alert, living alertly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacittā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate with their minds firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesu catūsu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, kandaraka, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu vedanānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte cittānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, pesso hatthārohaputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, Pessa said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva supaññattā cime, bhante, bhagavatā cattāro satipaṭṭhānā sattānaṃ visuddhiyā sokaparidevānaṃ samatikkamāya dukkhadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamāya ñāyassa adhigamāya nibbānassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how much the Buddha has clearly described the four kinds of mindfulness meditation! They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to end the cycle of suffering, and to realize extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayampi hi, bhante, gihī odātavasanā kālena kālaṃ imesu catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacittā viharāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For we white-clothed laypeople also from time to time meditate with our minds well established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha mayaṃ, bhante, kāye kāyānupassino viharāma ātāpino sampajānā satimanto, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">We meditate observing an aspect of the body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu vedanānupassino viharāma ātāpino sampajānā satimanto, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte cittānupassino viharāma ātāpino sampajānā satimanto, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassino viharāma ātāpino sampajānā satimanto, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvañcidaṃ, bhante, bhagavā evaṃ manussagahane evaṃ manussakasaṭe evaṃ manussasāṭheyye vattamāne sattānaṃ hitāhitaṃ jānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How the Buddha knows what’s best for sentient beings, even though people continue to be so shady, rotten, and tricky. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahanañhetaṃ, bhante, yadidaṃ manussā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For human beings are shady, sir, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uttānakañhetaṃ, bhante, yadidaṃ pasavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while the animal is obvious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, bhante, pahomi hatthidammaṃ sāretuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I can drive an elephant in training, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatakena antarena campaṃ gatāgataṃ karissati sabbāni tāni sāṭheyyāni kūṭeyyāni vaṅkeyyāni jimheyyāni pātukarissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and while going back and forth in Campā it’ll try all the tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints that it can. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākaṃ pana, bhante, dāsāti vā pessāti vā kammakarāti vā aññathāva kāyena samudācaranti aññathāva vācāya aññathāva nesaṃ cittaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But my bondservants, employees, and workers behave one way by body, another by speech, and their minds another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvañcidaṃ, bhante, bhagavā evaṃ manussagahane evaṃ manussakasaṭe evaṃ manussasāṭheyye vattamāne sattānaṃ hitāhitaṃ jānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How the Buddha knows what’s best for sentient beings, even though people continue to be so shady, rotten, and tricky. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahanañhetaṃ, bhante, yadidaṃ manussā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For human beings are shady, sir, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uttānakañhetaṃ, bhante, yadidaṃ pasavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while the animal is obvious.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, pessa, evametaṃ, pessa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, Pessa! That’s so true! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahanañhetaṃ, pessa, yadidaṃ manussā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For human beings are shady, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uttānakañhetaṃ, pessa, yadidaṃ pasavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while the animal is obvious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārome, pessa, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pessa, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, pessa, ekacco puggalo attantapo hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idha pana, pessa, ekacco puggalo parantapo hoti paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idha pana, pessa, ekacco puggalo attantapo ca hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto, parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person mortifies themselves and others, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idha pana, pessa, ekacco puggalo nevattantapo hoti nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anattantapo aparantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live without wishes in the present life, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ, pessa, catunnaṃ puggalānaṃ katamo te puggalo cittaṃ ārādhetī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which one of these four people do you like the sound of?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yvāyaṃ, bhante, puggalo attantapo attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto, ayaṃ me puggalo cittaṃ nārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I don’t like the sound of the first three people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopāyaṃ, bhante, puggalo parantapo paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto, ayampi me puggalo cittaṃ nārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopāyaṃ, bhante, puggalo attantapo ca attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto, ayampi me puggalo cittaṃ nārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca kho ayaṃ, bhante, puggalo nevattantapo nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto, so anattantapo aparantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayameva me puggalo cittaṃ ārādhetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I only like the sound of the last person, who doesn’t mortify either themselves or others.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kasmā pana te, pessa, ime tayo puggalā cittaṃ nārādhentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But why don’t you like the sound of those three people?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yvāyaṃ, bhante, puggalo attantapo attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto so attānaṃ sukhakāmaṃ dukkhapaṭikkūlaṃ ātāpeti paritāpeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the person who mortifies themselves does so even though they want to be happy and recoil from pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iminā me ayaṃ puggalo cittaṃ nārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I don’t like the sound of that person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopāyaṃ, bhante, puggalo parantapo paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto so paraṃ sukhakāmaṃ dukkhapaṭikkūlaṃ ātāpeti paritāpeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who mortifies others does so even though others want to be happy and recoil from pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iminā me ayaṃ puggalo cittaṃ nārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I don’t like the sound of that person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopāyaṃ, bhante, puggalo attantapo ca attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto so attānañca parañca sukhakāmaṃ dukkhapaṭikkūlaṃ ātāpeti paritāpeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who mortifies themselves and others does so even though both themselves and others want to be happy and recoil from pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iminā me ayaṃ puggalo cittaṃ nārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I don’t like the sound of that person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca kho ayaṃ, bhante, puggalo nevattantapo nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto so anattantapo aparantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who doesn’t mortify either themselves or others—living without wishes, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves—does not torment themselves or others, both of whom want to be happy and recoil from pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so attānañca parañca sukhakāmaṃ dukkhapaṭikkūlaṃ neva ātāpeti na paritāpeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iminā me ayaṃ puggalo cittaṃ ārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I like the sound of that person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handa ca dāni mayaṃ, bhante, gacchāma; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well, now, sir, I must go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahukiccā mayaṃ bahukaraṇīyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have many duties, and much to do.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassadāni tvaṃ, pessa, kālaṃ maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, Pessa, go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho pesso hatthārohaputto bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Pessa the elephant driver’s son approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā acirapakkante pesse hatthārohaputte bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, not long after he had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṇḍito, bhikkhave, pesso hatthārohaputto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, Pessa the elephant driver’s son is astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahāpañño, bhikkhave, pesso hatthārohaputto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has great wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, bhikkhave, pesso hatthārohaputto muhuttaṃ nisīdeyya yāvassāhaṃ ime cattāro puggale vitthārena vibhajissāmi, mahatā atthena saṃyutto abhavissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he had sat here a little longer so that I could have analyzed these four people in detail, he would have greatly benefited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca, bhikkhave, ettāvatāpi pesso hatthārohaputto mahatā atthena saṃyutto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Still, even with this much he has already greatly benefited.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etassa, bhagavā, kālo, etassa, sugata, kālo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ bhagavā ime cattāro puggale vitthārena vibhajeyya. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Buddha analyze these four people in detail. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhikkhave, suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, mendicants, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo attantapo attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo acelako hoti muttācāro hatthāpalekhano naehibhaddantiko natiṭṭhabhaddantiko; nābhihaṭaṃ na uddissakataṃ na nimantanaṃ sādiyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves? It’s when someone goes naked, ignoring conventions. They lick their hands, and don’t come or wait when asked. They don’t consent to food brought to them, or food prepared for them, or an invitation for a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so na kumbhimukhā paṭiggaṇhāti na kaḷopimukhā paṭiggaṇhāti na eḷakamantaraṃ na daṇḍamantaraṃ na musalamantaraṃ na dvinnaṃ bhuñjamānānaṃ na gabbhiniyā na pāyamānāya na purisantaragatāya na saṅkittīsu na yattha sā upaṭṭhito hoti na yattha makkhikā saṇḍasaṇḍacārinī; na macchaṃ na maṃsaṃ na suraṃ na merayaṃ na thusodakaṃ pivati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or where there’s a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or liquor or wine, and drink no beer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ekāgāriko vā hoti ekālopiko, dvāgāriko vā hoti dvālopiko … pe … sattāgāriko vā hoti sattālopiko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They go to just one house for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekissāpi dattiyā yāpeti, dvīhipi dattīhi yāpeti … pe … sattahipi dattīhi yāpeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāreti, dvīhikampi āhāraṃ āhāreti … pe … sattāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāreti—iti evarūpaṃ aḍḍhamāsikaṃ pariyāyabhattabhojanānuyogamanuyutto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat once a day, once every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They live committed to the practice of eating food at set intervals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sākabhakkho vā hoti, sāmākabhakkho vā hoti, nīvārabhakkho vā hoti, daddulabhakkho vā hoti, haṭabhakkho vā hoti, kaṇabhakkho vā hoti, ācāmabhakkho vā hoti, piññākabhakkho vā hoti, tiṇabhakkho vā hoti, gomayabhakkho vā hoti; vanamūlaphalāhāro yāpeti pavattaphalabhojī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sāṇānipi dhāreti, masāṇānipi dhāreti, chavadussānipi dhāreti, paṃsukūlānipi dhāreti, tirīṭānipi dhāreti, ajinampi dhāreti, ajinakkhipampi dhāreti, kusacīrampi dhāreti, vākacīrampi dhāreti, phalakacīrampi dhāreti, kesakambalampi dhāreti, vāḷakambalampi dhāreti, ulūkapakkhampi dhāreti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark, wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls’ wings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kesamassulocakopi hoti, kesamassulocanānuyogamanuyutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They tear out their hair and beard, committed to this practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubbhaṭṭhakopi hoti āsanapaṭikkhitto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They constantly stand, refusing seats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkuṭikopi hoti ukkuṭikappadhānamanuyutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They squat, committed to the endeavor of squatting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṇṭakāpassayikopi hoti kaṇṭakāpassaye seyyaṃ kappeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāyatatiyakampi udakorohanānuyogamanuyutto viharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re committed to the practice of immersion in water three times a day, including the evening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti evarūpaṃ anekavihitaṃ kāyassa ātāpanaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so they live committed to practicing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo attantapo attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who mortifies themselves, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo parantapo paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what person mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo orabbhiko hoti sūkariko sākuṇiko māgaviko luddo macchaghātako coro coraghātako goghātako bandhanāgāriko, ye vā panaññepi keci kurūrakammantā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is a slaughterer of sheep, pigs, or poultry, a hunter or trapper, a fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a butcher, a jailer, or someone with some other kind of cruel livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo parantapo paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who mortifies others, being committed to the practice of mortifying others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo attantapo ca attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what person mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo rājā vā hoti khattiyo muddhāvasitto brāhmaṇo vā mahāsālo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is an anointed king or a well-to-do brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So puratthimena nagarassa navaṃ santhāgāraṃ kārāpetvā kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kharājinaṃ nivāsetvā sappitelena kāyaṃ abbhañjitvā magavisāṇena piṭṭhiṃ kaṇḍuvamāno navaṃ santhāgāraṃ pavisati saddhiṃ mahesiyā brāhmaṇena ca purohitena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a new temple built to the east of the city. He shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with ghee and oil. Scratching his back with antlers, he enters the temple with his chief queen and the brahmin high priest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha anantarahitāya bhūmiyā haritupalittāya seyyaṃ kappeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There he lies on the bare ground strewn with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekissāya gāviyā sarūpavacchāya yaṃ ekasmiṃ thane khīraṃ hoti tena rājā yāpeti, yaṃ dutiyasmiṃ thane khīraṃ hoti tena mahesī yāpeti, yaṃ tatiyasmiṃ thane khīraṃ hoti tena brāhmaṇo purohito yāpeti, yaṃ catutthasmiṃ thane khīraṃ hoti tena aggiṃ juhati, avasesena vacchako yāpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The king feeds on the milk from one teat of a cow that has a calf of the same color. The chief queen feeds on the milk from the second teat. The brahmin high priest feeds on the milk from the third teat. The milk from the fourth teat is offered to the flames. The calf feeds on the remainder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakā usabhā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā vacchatarā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā vacchatariyo haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā ajā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā urabbhā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā assā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā rukkhā chijjantu yūpatthāya, ettakā dabbhā lūyantu barihisatthāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Slaughter this many bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats, rams, and horses for the sacrifice! Fell this many trees and reap this much grass for the sacrificial equipment!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepissa te honti dāsāti vā pessāti vā kammakarāti vā tepi daṇḍatajjitā bhayatajjitā assumukhā rudamānā parikammāni karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His bondservants, employees, and workers do their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping with tearful faces. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo attantapo ca attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo nevattantapo nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto, so anattantapo aparantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what person doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, but lives without wishes, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, tathāgato loke uppajjati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ lokaṃ sadevakaṃ samārakaṃ sabrahmakaṃ sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiṃ pajaṃ sadevamanussaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ dhammaṃ suṇāti gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā aññatarasmiṃ vā kule paccājāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder hears that teaching, or a householder’s child, or someone reborn in some clan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ dhammaṃ sutvā tathāgate saddhaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They gain faith in the Realized One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena saddhāpaṭilābhena samannāgato iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and reflect: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sambādho gharāvāso rajāpatho, abbhokāso pabbajjā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Living in a house is cramped and dirty, but the life of one gone forth is wide open. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nayidaṃ sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṃ ekantaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajeyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena appaṃ vā bhogakkhandhaṃ pahāya, mahantaṃ vā bhogakkhandhaṃ pahāya, appaṃ vā ñātiparivaṭṭaṃ pahāya, mahantaṃ vā ñātiparivaṭṭaṃ pahāya, kesamassuṃ ohāretvā, kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pabbajito samāno bhikkhūnaṃ sikkhāsājīvasamāpanno pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti nihitadaṇḍo nihitasattho, lajjī dayāpanno sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once they’ve gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādānaṃ pahāya adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti dinnādāyī dinnapāṭikaṅkhī, athenena sucibhūtena attanā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up stealing. They take only what’s given, and expect only what’s given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abrahmacariyaṃ pahāya brahmacārī hoti ārācārī virato methunā gāmadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the common practice of sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādaṃ pahāya musāvādā paṭivirato hoti saccavādī saccasandho theto paccayiko avisaṃvādako lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They’re honest and trustworthy, and don’t trick the world with their words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pisuṇaṃ vācaṃ pahāya pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, ito sutvā na amutra akkhātā imesaṃ bhedāya, amutra vā sutvā na imesaṃ akkhātā amūsaṃ bhedāya—iti bhinnānaṃ vā sandhātā sahitānaṃ vā anuppadātā samaggārāmo samaggarato samagganandī samaggakaraṇiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up divisive speech. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusaṃ vācaṃ pahāya pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, yā sā vācā nelā kaṇṇasukhā pemanīyā hadayaṅgamā porī bahujanakantā bahujanamanāpā tathārūpiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samphappalāpaṃ pahāya samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti kālavādī bhūtavādī atthavādī dhammavādī vinayavādī, nidhānavatiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā kālena sāpadesaṃ pariyantavatiṃ atthasaṃhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bījagāmabhūtagāmasamārambhā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid injuring plants and seeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekabhattiko hoti rattūparato virato vikālabhojanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">naccagītavāditavisūkadassanā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid dancing, singing, music, and seeing shows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mālāgandhavilepanadhāraṇamaṇḍanavibhūsanaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid beautifying and adorning themselves with garlands, perfumes, and makeup. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uccāsayanamahāsayanā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid high and luxurious beds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātarūparajatapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid receiving gold and money, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmakadhaññapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">raw grains, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmakamaṃsapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">raw meat, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthikumārikapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">women and girls, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāsidāsapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">male and female bondservants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajeḷakapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">goats and sheep, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuṭasūkarapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">chickens and pigs, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthigavassavaḷavapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">elephants, cows, horses, and mares, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khettavatthupaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and fields and land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dūteyyapahiṇagamanānuyogā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid running errands and messages; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kayavikkayā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">buying and selling; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tulākūṭakaṃsakūṭamānakūṭā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">falsifying weights, metals, or measures; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkoṭanavañcananikatisāciyogā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chedanavadhabandhanaviparāmosaālopasahasākārā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So santuṭṭho hoti kāyaparihārikena cīvarena kucchiparihārikena piṇḍapātena. So yena yeneva pakkamati, samādāyeva pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re content with robes to look after the body and alms-food to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma pakkhī sakuṇo yena yeneva ḍeti, sapattabhārova ḍeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti kāyaparihārikena cīvarena kucchiparihārikena piṇḍapātena. So yena yeneva pakkamati, samādāyeva pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and alms-food to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā ariyena sīlakkhandhena samannāgato ajjhattaṃ anavajjasukhaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they see a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati, rakkhati cakkhundriyaṃ, cakkhundriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear a sound with their ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they smell an odor with their nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they taste a flavor with their tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they feel a touch with their body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they know a thought with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati, rakkhati manindriyaṃ, manindriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā ariyena indriyasaṃvarena samannāgato ajjhattaṃ abyāsekasukhaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss inside themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So abhikkante paṭikkante sampajānakārī hoti, ālokite vilokite sampajānakārī hoti, samiñjite pasārite sampajānakārī hoti, saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇe sampajānakārī hoti, asite pīte khāyite sāyite sampajānakārī hoti, uccārapassāvakamme sampajānakārī hoti, gate ṭhite nisinne sutte jāgarite bhāsite tuṇhībhāve sampajānakārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā ca ariyena sīlakkhandhena samannāgato, imāya ca ariyāya santuṭṭhiyā samannāgato, iminā ca ariyena indriyasaṃvarena samannāgato, iminā ca ariyena satisampajaññena samannāgato </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have this noble spectrum of ethics, this noble contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivittaṃ senāsanaṃ bhajati araññaṃ rukkhamūlaṃ pabbataṃ kandaraṃ giriguhaṃ susānaṃ vanapatthaṃ abbhokāsaṃ palālapuñjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they frequent a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After the meal, they return from alms-round, sit down cross-legged with their body straight, and establish mindfulness right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So abhijjhaṃ loke pahāya vigatābhijjhena cetasā viharati, abhijjhāya cittaṃ parisodheti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up desire for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of desire, cleansing the mind of desire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">byāpādapadosaṃ pahāya abyāpannacitto viharati sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī, byāpādapadosā cittaṃ parisodheti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up ill will, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of compassion for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will and malevolence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">thinamiddhaṃ pahāya vigatathinamiddho viharati ālokasaññī sato sampajāno, thinamiddhā cittaṃ parisodheti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddhaccakukkuccaṃ pahāya anuddhato viharati ajjhattaṃ vūpasantacitto, uddhaccakukkuccā cittaṃ parisodheti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up restlessness and remorse, they meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vicikicchaṃ pahāya tiṇṇavicikiccho viharati akathaṃkathī kusalesu dhammesu, vicikicchāya cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ime pañca nīvaraṇe pahāya cetaso upakkilese paññāya dubbalīkaraṇe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca viharati sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṃvedeti, yaṃ taṃ ariyā ācikkhanti: ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte pubbenivāsānussatiñāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo tissopi jātiyo catassopi jātiyo pañcapi jātiyo dasapi jātiyo vīsampi jātiyo tiṃsampi jātiyo cattālīsampi jātiyo paññāsampi jātiyo jātisatampi jātisahassampi jātisatasahassampi anekepi saṃvaṭṭakappe anekepi vivaṭṭakappe anekepi saṃvaṭṭavivaṭṭakappe: ‘amutrāsiṃ evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto evaṃvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṃsukhadukkhappaṭisaṃvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto amutra udapādiṃ; tatrāpāsiṃ evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto evaṃvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṃsukhadukkhappaṭisaṃvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto idhūpapanno’ti. Iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte sattānaṃ cutūpapātañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajānāti: ‘ime vata bhonto sattā kāyaduccaritena samannāgatā vacīduccaritena samannāgatā manoduccaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṃ upavādakā micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannā; ime vā pana bhonto sattā kāyasucaritena samannāgatā vacīsucaritena samannāgatā manosucaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṃ anupavādakā sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapannā’ti. Iti dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte āsavānaṃ khayañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. ‘Ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. ‘Ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. ‘Ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ime āsavā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. ‘Ayaṃ āsavasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. ‘Ayaṃ āsavanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. ‘Ayaṃ āsavanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ jānato evaṃ passato kāmāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, bhavāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, avijjāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo nevattantapo nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto, na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who neither mortifies themselves or others, being committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So attantapo aparantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live without wishes in the present life, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kandarakasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
