<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn064-Mahāmālukyasutta  - The Longer Discourse With Māluṅkya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Mahāmālukyasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">The Longer Discourse With Māluṅkya </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 64  - Middle Discourses 64 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dhāretha no tumhe, bhikkhave, mayā desitāni pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, do you remember the five lower fetters that I taught?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā mālukyaputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Māluṅkyaputta said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṃ kho, bhante, dhāremi bhagavatā desitāni pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I remember them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana tvaṃ, mālukyaputta, dhāresi mayā desitāni pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how do you remember them?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkāyadiṭṭhiṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ desitaṃ dhāremi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I remember the lower fetters taught by the Buddha as follows: identity view, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vicikicchaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ desitaṃ dhāremi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">doubt, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlabbataparāmāsaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ desitaṃ dhāremi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">misapprehension of precepts and observances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmacchandaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ desitaṃ dhāremi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">sensual desire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">byāpādaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ desitaṃ dhāremi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, dhāremi bhagavatā desitāni pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how I remember the five lower fetters taught by the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kassa kho nāma tvaṃ, mālukyaputta, imāni evaṃ pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni desitāni dhāresi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who on earth do you remember being taught the five lower fetters in that way? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nanu, mālukyaputta, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā iminā taruṇūpamena upārambhena upārambhissanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wouldn’t the wanderers who follow other paths fault you using the simile of the infant? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharassa hi, mālukyaputta, kumārassa mandassa uttānaseyyakassa sakkāyotipi na hoti, kuto panassa uppajjissati sakkāyadiṭṭhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘identity’, so how could identity view possibly arise in them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusetvevassa sakkāyadiṭṭhānusayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet the underlying tendency to identity view still lies within them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharassa hi, mālukyaputta, kumārassa mandassa uttānaseyyakassa dhammātipi na hoti, kuto panassa uppajjissati dhammesu vicikicchā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">A little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘teachings’, so how could doubt about the teachings possibly arise in them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusetvevassa vicikicchānusayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet the underlying tendency to doubt still lies within them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharassa hi, mālukyaputta, kumārassa mandassa uttānaseyyakassa sīlātipi na hoti, kuto panassa uppajjissati sīlesu sīlabbataparāmāso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">A little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘precepts’, so how could misapprehension of precepts and observances possibly arise in them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusetvevassa sīlabbataparāmāsānusayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet the underlying tendency to misapprehension of precepts and observances still lies within them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharassa hi, mālukyaputta, kumārassa mandassa uttānaseyyakassa kāmātipi na hoti, kuto panassa uppajjissati kāmesu kāmacchando? </span></p>
<p class="p3">A little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘sensual pleasures’, so how could desire for sensual pleasures possibly arise in them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusetvevassa kāmarāgānusayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet the underlying tendency to sensual desire still lies within them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharassa hi, mālukyaputta, kumārassa mandassa uttānaseyyakassa sattātipi na hoti, kuto panassa uppajjissati sattesu byāpādo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">A little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘sentient beings’, so how could ill will for sentient beings possibly arise in them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusetvevassa byāpādānusayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet the underlying tendency to ill will still lies within them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nanu, mālukyaputta, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā iminā taruṇūpamena upārambhena upārambhissantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wouldn’t the wanderers who follow other paths fault you using the simile of the infant?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etassa, bhagavā, kālo, etassa, sugata, kālo </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ bhagavā pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni deseyya. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Buddha teach the five lower fetters. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hānanda, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Ānanda, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhānanda, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṃ adassāvī ariyadhammassa akovido ariyadhamme avinīto, sappurisānaṃ adassāvī sappurisadhammassa akovido sappurisadhamme avinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, take an uneducated ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkāyadiṭṭhipariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati sakkāyadiṭṭhiparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is overcome and mired in identity view, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannāya ca sakkāyadiṭṭhiyā nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they don’t truly understand the escape from identity view that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sā sakkāyadiṭṭhi thāmagatā appaṭivinītā orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That identity view is reinforced in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicikicchāpariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati vicikicchāparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is overcome and mired in doubt, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannāya ca vicikicchāya nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they don’t truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sā vicikicchā thāmagatā appaṭivinītā orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That doubt is reinforced in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlabbataparāmāsapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati sīlabbataparāmāsaparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is overcome and mired in misapprehension of precepts and observances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannassa ca sīlabbataparāmāsassa nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they don’t truly understand the escape from misapprehension of precepts and observances that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa so sīlabbataparāmāso thāmagato appaṭivinīto orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That misapprehension of precepts and observances is reinforced in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmarāgapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati kāmarāgaparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannassa ca kāmarāgassa nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they don’t truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa so kāmarāgo thāmagato appaṭivinīto orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That sensual desire is reinforced in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpādapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati byāpādaparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is overcome and mired in ill will, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannassa ca byāpādassa nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they don’t truly understand the escape from ill will that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa so byāpādo thāmagato appaṭivinīto orambhāgiyaṃ saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That ill will is reinforced in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutavā ca kho, ānanda, ariyasāvako ariyānaṃ dassāvī ariyadhammassa kovido ariyadhamme suvinīto, sappurisānaṃ dassāvī sappurisadhammassa kovido sappurisadhamme suvinīto na sakkāyadiṭṭhipariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati na sakkāyadiṭṭhiparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But an educated noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons. Their heart is not overcome and mired in identity view, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannāya ca sakkāyadiṭṭhiyā nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they truly understand the escape from identity view that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sā sakkāyadiṭṭhi sānusayā pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That identity view, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na vicikicchāpariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati na vicikicchāparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is not overcome and mired in doubt, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannāya ca vicikicchāya nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sā vicikicchā sānusayā pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That doubt, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sīlabbataparāmāsapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati na sīlabbataparāmāsaparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is not overcome and mired in misapprehension of precepts and observances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannassa ca sīlabbataparāmāsassa nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they truly understand the escape from misapprehension of precepts and observances that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa so sīlabbataparāmāso sānusayo pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That misapprehension of precepts and observances, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kāmarāgapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati na kāmarāgaparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is not overcome and mired in sensual desire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannassa ca kāmarāgassa nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa so kāmarāgo sānusayo pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That sensual desire, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na byāpādapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati na byāpādaparetena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is not overcome and mired in ill will, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannassa ca byāpādassa nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they truly understand the escape from ill will that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa so byāpādo sānusayo pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That ill will, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, ānanda, maggo yā paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya taṃ maggaṃ taṃ paṭipadaṃ anāgamma pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni ñassati vā dakkhati vā pajahissati vāti—netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a path and a practice for giving up the five lower fetters. It’s not possible to know or see or give up the five lower fetters without relying on that path and that practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, mahato rukkhassa tiṭṭhato sāravato tacaṃ acchetvā phegguṃ acchetvā sāracchedo bhavissatīti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood. It’s not possible to cut out the heartwood without having cut through the bark and the softwood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, ānanda, yo maggo yā paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya taṃ maggaṃ taṃ paṭipadaṃ anāgamma pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni ñassati vā dakkhati vā pajahissati vāti—netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there is a path and a practice for giving up the five lower fetters. It’s not possible to know or see or give up the five lower fetters without relying on that path and that practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca kho, ānanda, maggo yā paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya taṃ maggaṃ taṃ paṭipadaṃ āgamma pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni ñassati vā dakkhati vā pajahissati vāti—ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a path and a practice for giving up the five lower fetters. It is possible to know and see and give up the five lower fetters by relying on that path and that practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, mahato rukkhassa tiṭṭhato sāravato tacaṃ chetvā phegguṃ chetvā sāracchedo bhavissatīti—ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood. It is possible to cut out the heartwood after having cut through the bark and the softwood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, ānanda, yo maggo yā paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya taṃ maggaṃ taṃ paṭipadaṃ āgamma pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni ñassati vā dakkhati vā pajahissati vāti—ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there is a path and a practice for giving up the five lower fetters. It is possible to know and see and give up the five lower fetters by relying on that path and that practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, gaṅgā nadī pūrā udakassa samatittikā kākapeyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose the river Ganges was full to the brim so a crow could drink from it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha dubbalako puriso āgaccheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then along comes a feeble person, who thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ imissā gaṅgāya nadiyā tiriyaṃ bāhāya sotaṃ chetvā sotthinā pāraṃ gacchissāmī’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘By swimming with my arms I’ll safely cross over to the far shore of the Ganges.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so na sakkuṇeyya gaṅgāya nadiyā tiriyaṃ bāhāya sotaṃ chetvā sotthinā pāraṃ gantuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they’re not able to do so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, ānanda, yesaṃ kesañci sakkāyanirodhāya dhamme desiyamāne cittaṃ na pakkhandati nappasīdati na santiṭṭhati na vimuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the Dhamma is being taught for the cessation of identity view, someone whose mind isn’t eager, confident, settled, and decided </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi so dubbalako puriso evamete daṭṭhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">should be regarded as being like that feeble person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, gaṅgā nadī pūrā udakassa samatittikā kākapeyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose the river Ganges was full to the brim so a crow could drink from it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha balavā puriso āgaccheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then along comes a strong person, who thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ imissā gaṅgāya nadiyā tiriyaṃ bāhāya sotaṃ chetvā sotthinā pāraṃ gacchissāmī’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘By swimming with my arms I’ll safely cross over to the far shore of the Ganges.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so sakkuṇeyya gaṅgāya nadiyā tiriyaṃ bāhāya sotaṃ chetvā sotthinā pāraṃ gantuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they are able to do so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, ānanda, yesaṃ kesañci sakkāyanirodhāya dhamme desiyamāne cittaṃ pakkhandati pasīdati santiṭṭhati vimuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the Dhamma is being taught for the cessation of identity view, someone whose mind is eager, confident, settled, and decided </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi so balavā puriso evamete daṭṭhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">should be regarded as being like that strong person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo cānanda, maggo, katamā paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what, Ānanda, is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu upadhivivekā akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānā sabbaso kāyaduṭṭhullānaṃ paṭippassaddhiyā vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant—due to the seclusion from attachments, the giving up of unskillful qualities, and the complete settling of physical discomfort—quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yadeva tattha hoti rūpagataṃ vedanāgataṃ saññāgataṃ saṅkhāragataṃ viññāṇagataṃ te dhamme aniccato dukkhato rogato gaṇḍato sallato aghato ābādhato parato palokato suññato anattato samanupassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They contemplate the phenomena there—included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness—as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as an abscess, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi dhammehi cittaṃ paṭivāpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They turn their mind away from those things, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi dhammehi cittaṃ paṭivāpetvā amatāya dhātuyā cittaṃ upasaṃharati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and apply it to the deathless element: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ santaṃ etaṃ paṇītaṃ yadidaṃ sabbasaṅkhārasamatho sabbūpadhipaṭinissaggo taṇhākkhayo virāgo nirodho nibbānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, cessation, extinguishment.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha ṭhito āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pāpuṇāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pāpuṇāti teneva dhammarāgena tāya dhammanandiyā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko hoti, tattha parinibbāyī, anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, ānanda, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā … pe … dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">third absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yadeva tattha hoti rūpagataṃ vedanāgataṃ saññāgataṃ saṅkhāragataṃ viññāṇagataṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They contemplate the phenomena there as impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They turn their mind away from those things … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, they’re reborn spontaneously … and are not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, ānanda, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhu sabbaso rūpasaññānaṃ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānaṃ atthaṅgamā nānattasaññānaṃ amanasikārā ‘ananto ākāso’ti ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yadeva tattha hoti vedanāgataṃ saññāgataṃ saṅkhāragataṃ viññāṇagataṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They contemplate the phenomena there as impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They turn their mind away from those things … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, they’re reborn spontaneously … and are not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, ānanda, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhu sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘anantaṃ viññāṇan’ti viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yadeva tattha hoti vedanāgataṃ saññāgataṃ saṅkhāragataṃ viññāṇagataṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They contemplate the phenomena there as impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They turn their mind away from those things … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, they’re reborn spontaneously … and are not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, ānanda, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhu sabbaso viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘natthi kiñcī’ti ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yadeva tattha hoti vedanāgataṃ saññāgataṃ saṅkhāragataṃ viññāṇagataṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They contemplate the phenomena there as impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They turn their mind away from those things … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, they’re reborn spontaneously … and are not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, ānanda, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eso ce, bhante, maggo esā paṭipadā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ pahānāya, atha kiñcarahi idhekacce bhikkhū cetovimuttino ekacce bhikkhū paññāvimuttino”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, if this is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters, how come some mendicants here are released in heart while others are released by wisdom?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ettha kho panesāhaṃ, ānanda, indriyavemattataṃ vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, I say it is the diversity of their faculties.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamano āyasmā ānando bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda was happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāmālukyasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
