<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn086-Aṅgulimālasutta  - With Aṅgulimāla </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Aṅgulimālasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">With Aṅgulimāla </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 86  - Middle Discourses 86 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rañño pasenadissa kosalassa vijite coro aṅgulimālo nāma hoti luddo lohitapāṇi hatapahate niviṭṭho adayāpanno pāṇabhūtesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time in the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala there was a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He was violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena gāmāpi agāmā katā, nigamāpi anigamā katā, janapadāpi ajanapadā katā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He laid waste to villages, towns, and countries. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So manusse vadhitvā vadhitvā aṅgulīnaṃ mālaṃ dhāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He was constantly murdering people, and he wore their fingers as a necklace. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto senāsanaṃ saṃsāmetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena coro aṅgulimālo tenaddhānamaggaṃ paṭipajji. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after the meal, on his return from alms-round, he set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, he walked down the road that led to Aṅgulimāla. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasāsuṃ kho gopālakā pasupālakā kassakā pathāvino bhagavantaṃ yena coro aṅgulimālo tenaddhānamaggapaṭipannaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cowherds, shepherds, farmers, and travelers saw him on the road, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mā, samaṇa, etaṃ maggaṃ paṭipajji. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t take this road, ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etasmiṃ, samaṇa, magge coro aṅgulimālo nāma luddo lohitapāṇi hatapahate niviṭṭho adayāpanno pāṇabhūtesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this road there is a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He is violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena gāmāpi agāmā katā, nigamāpi anigamā katā, janapadāpi ajanapadā katā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has laid waste to villages, towns, and countries. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So manusse vadhitvā vadhitvā aṅgulīnaṃ mālaṃ dhāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is constantly murdering people, and he wears their fingers as a necklace. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañhi, samaṇa, maggaṃ dasapi purisā vīsampi purisā tiṃsampi purisā cattārīsampi purisā paññāsampi purisā saṅkaritvā saṅkaritvā paṭipajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">People travel along this road only after banding closely together in groups of ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tepi corassa aṅgulimālassa hatthatthaṃ gacchantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Still they meet their end by Aṅgulimāla’s hand.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhagavā tuṇhībhūto agamāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they said this, the Buddha went on in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho gopālakā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho gopālakā pasupālakā kassakā pathāvino bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time, they urged the Buddha to turn back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mā, samaṇa, etaṃ maggaṃ paṭipajji, etasmiṃ samaṇa magge coro aṅgulimālo nāma luddo lohitapāṇi hatapahate niviṭṭho adayāpanno pāṇabhūtesu, tena gāmāpi agāmā katā, nigamāpi anigamā katā, janapadāpi ajanapadā katā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So manusse vadhitvā vadhitvā aṅgulīnaṃ mālaṃ dhāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañhi samaṇa maggaṃ dasapi purisā vīsampi purisā tiṃsampi purisā cattārīsampi purisā paññāsampi purisā saṅkaritvā saṅkaritvā paṭipajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tepi corassa aṅgulimālassa hatthatthaṃ gacchantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tuṇhībhūto agamāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they said this, the Buddha went on in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho coro aṅgulimālo bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The bandit Aṅgulimāla saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvānassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ vata bho, abbhutaṃ vata bho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imañhi maggaṃ dasapi purisā vīsampi purisā tiṃsampi purisā cattārīsampi purisā paññāsampi purisā saṅkaritvā saṅkaritvā paṭipajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">People travel along this road only after banding closely together in groups of ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tepi mama hatthatthaṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Still they meet their end by my hand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ca panāyaṃ samaṇo eko adutiyo pasayha maññe āgacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But still this ascetic comes along alone and unaccompanied, like he had beaten me already. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ imaṃ samaṇaṃ jīvitā voropeyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I take his life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho coro aṅgulimālo asicammaṃ gahetvā dhanukalāpaṃ sannayhitvā bhagavantaṃ piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Aṅgulimāla donned his sword and shield, fastened his bow and arrows, and followed behind the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tathārūpaṃ iddhābhisaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkhāsi yathā coro aṅgulimālo bhagavantaṃ pakatiyā gacchantaṃ sabbathāmena gacchanto na sakkoti sampāpuṇituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha used his psychic power to will that Aṅgulimāla could not catch up with him no matter how hard he tried, even though the Buddha kept walking at a normal speed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho corassa aṅgulimālassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Aṅgulimāla thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ vata bho, abbhutaṃ vata bho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi pubbe hatthimpi dhāvantaṃ anupatitvā gaṇhāmi, assampi dhāvantaṃ anupatitvā gaṇhāmi, rathampi dhāvantaṃ anupatitvā gaṇhāmi, migampi dhāvantaṃ anupatitvā gaṇhāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Previously, even when I’ve chased a speeding elephant, horse, chariot or deer, I’ve always caught up with them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca panāhaṃ imaṃ samaṇaṃ pakatiyā gacchantaṃ sabbathāmena gacchanto na sakkomi sampāpuṇitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I can’t catch up with this ascetic no matter how hard I try, even though he’s walking at a normal speed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhitova bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He stood still and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tiṭṭha, tiṭṭha, samaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Stop, stop, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ṭhito ahaṃ, aṅgulimāla, tvañca tiṭṭhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve stopped, Aṅgulimāla—now you stop.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho corassa aṅgulimālassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Aṅgulimāla thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ime kho samaṇā sakyaputtiyā saccavādino saccapaṭiññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These Sakyan ascetics speak the truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha panāyaṃ samaṇo gacchaṃ yevāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet while walking the ascetic Gotama says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ṭhito ahaṃ, aṅgulimāla, tvañca tiṭṭhā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve stopped, Aṅgulimāla—now you stop.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ imaṃ samaṇaṃ puccheyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I ask him about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho coro aṅgulimālo bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gacchaṃ vadesi samaṇa ṭhitomhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“While walking, ascetic, you say ‘I’ve stopped.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mamañca brūsi ṭhitamaṭṭhitoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I have stopped, but you tell me I’ve not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pucchāmi taṃ samaṇa etamatthaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m asking you this, ascetic: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ ṭhito tvaṃ ahamaṭṭhitomhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how is it you’ve stopped and I have not?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ṭhito ahaṃ aṅgulimāla sabbadā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Aṅgulimāla, I have forever stopped—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbesu bhūtesu nidhāya daṇḍaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve cast off violence towards all creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuvañca pāṇesu asaññatosi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But you can’t stop yourself from harming living creatures; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā ṭhitohaṃ tuvamaṭṭhitosī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s why I’ve stopped, but you have not.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cirassaṃ vata me mahito mahesī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Oh, at long last a hermit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāvanaṃ pāpuṇi saccavādī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a great sage who I honor, has entered this great forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṃ carissāmi pahāya pāpaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now that I’ve heard your verse on Dhamma, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvāna gāthaṃ tava dhammayuttaṃ”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I shall live without evil.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itveva coro asimāvudhañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With these words, the bandit hurled his sword and weapons </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sobbhe papāte narake akiri; </span></p>
<p class="p3">down a cliff into a chasm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avandi coro sugatassa pāde, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He venerated the Holy One’s feet, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattheva naṃ pabbajjaṃ ayāci. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and asked him for the going forth right away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho ca kho kāruṇiko mahesi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, the compassionate great hermit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo satthā lokassa sadevakassa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teacher of the world with its gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tamehi bhikkhū”ti tadā avoca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">said to him, “Come, monk!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eseva tassa ahu bhikkhubhāvoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And with that he became a monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmatā aṅgulimālena pacchāsamaṇena yena sāvatthi tena cārikaṃ pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha set out for Sāvatthī with Venerable Aṅgulimāla as his second monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupubbena cārikaṃ caramāno yena sāvatthi tadavasari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Sāvatthī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra sudaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where he stayed in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rañño pasenadissa kosalassa antepuradvāre mahājanakāyo sannipatitvā uccāsaddo mahāsaddo hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a crowd had gathered by the gate of King Pasenadi’s royal compound making a dreadful racket, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“coro te, deva, vijite aṅgulimālo nāma luddo lohitapāṇi hatapahate niviṭṭho adayāpanno pāṇabhūtesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In your realm, Your Majesty, there is a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He is violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena gāmāpi agāmā katā, nigamāpi anigamā katā, janapadāpi ajanapadā katā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has laid waste to villages, towns, and countries. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So manusse vadhitvā vadhitvā aṅgulīnaṃ mālaṃ dhāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is constantly murdering people, and he wears their fingers as a necklace. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ devo paṭisedhetū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your Majesty must put a stop to him!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo pañcamattehi assasatehi sāvatthiyā nikkhami divā divassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi drove out from Sāvatthī in the middle of the day with around five hundred horses, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena ārāmo tena pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">heading for the monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatikā yānassa bhūmi yānena gantvā yānā paccorohitvā pattikova yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached the Buddha on foot. He bowed and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu te, mahārāja, rājā vā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro kupito vesālikā vā licchavī aññe vā paṭirājāno”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is it, great king? Is King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha angry with you, or the Licchavis of Vesālī, or some other opposing ruler?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho me, bhante, rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro kupito, nāpi vesālikā licchavī, nāpi aññe paṭirājāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Coro me, bhante, vijite aṅgulimālo nāma luddo lohitapāṇi hatapahate niviṭṭho adayāpanno pāṇabhūtesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In my realm there is a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He is violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena gāmāpi agāmā katā, nigamāpi anigamā katā, janapadāpi ajanapadā katā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So manusse vadhitvā vadhitvā aṅgulīnaṃ mālaṃ dhāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ, bhante, paṭisedhissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I shall put a stop to him.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace pana tvaṃ, mahārāja, aṅgulimālaṃ passeyyāsi kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitaṃ, virataṃ pāṇātipātā, virataṃ adinnādānā, virataṃ musāvādā, ekabhattikaṃ, brahmacāriṃ, sīlavantaṃ, kalyāṇadhammaṃ, kinti naṃ kareyyāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But great king, suppose you were to see that Aṅgulimāla had shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and gone forth from the lay life to homelessness. And that he was refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and lying; that he was eating in one part of the day, and was celibate, ethical, and of good character. What would you do to him?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhivādeyyāma vā, bhante, paccuṭṭheyyāma vā āsanena vā nimanteyyāma, abhinimanteyyāma vā naṃ cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārehi, dhammikaṃ vā assa rakkhāvaraṇaguttiṃ saṃvidaheyyāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I would bow to him, rise in his presence, or offer him a seat. I’d invite him to accept robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And I’d arrange for his lawful guarding and protection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuto panassa, bhante, dussīlassa pāpadhammassa evarūpo sīlasaṃyamo bhavissatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">But sir, how could such an immoral, evil man ever have such virtue and restraint?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā aṅgulimālo bhagavato avidūre nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time Venerable Aṅgulimāla was sitting not far from the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā dakkhiṇaṃ bāhuṃ paggahetvā rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha pointed with his right arm and said to the king, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“eso, mahārāja, aṅgulimālo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, this is Aṅgulimāla.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rañño pasenadissa kosalassa ahudeva bhayaṃ, ahu chambhitattaṃ, ahu lomahaṃso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the king became frightened, scared, his hair standing on end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ bhītaṃ saṃviggaṃ lomahaṭṭhajātaṃ viditvā rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing this, the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mā bhāyi, mahārāja, natthi te ito bhayan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do not fear, great king. You have nothing to fear from him.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rañño pasenadissa kosalassa yaṃ ahosi bhayaṃ vā chambhitattaṃ vā lomahaṃso vā so paṭippassambhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the king’s fear died down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo yenāyasmā aṅgulimālo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ aṅgulimālaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the king went over to Aṅgulimāla and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo no, bhante, aṅgulimālo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, is the venerable really Aṅgulimāla?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, mahārājā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, great king.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṅgotto ayyassa pitā, kathaṅgottā mātā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What clans were your father and mother from?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gaggo kho, mahārāja, pitā, mantāṇī mātā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“My father was a Gagga, and my mother a Mantāṇī.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhiramatu, bhante, ayyo gaggo mantāṇiputto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“May the venerable Gagga Mantāṇīputta be happy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahamayyassa gaggassa mantāṇiputtassa ussukkaṃ karissāmi cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll make sure that you’re provided with robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā aṅgulimālo āraññiko hoti piṇḍapātiko paṃsukūliko tecīvariko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But at that time Venerable Aṅgulimāla lived in the wilderness, ate only alms-food, and owned just three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So he said to the king, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṃ, mahārāja, paripuṇṇaṃ me cīvaran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Enough, great king. My robes are complete.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the king went back to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvañcidaṃ, bhante, bhagavā adantānaṃ dametā, asantānaṃ sametā, aparinibbutānaṃ parinibbāpetā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How the Buddha tames those who are wild, pacifies those who are violent, and extinguishes those who are unextinguished! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi mayaṃ, bhante, nāsakkhimhā daṇḍenapi satthenapi dametuṃ so bhagavatā adaṇḍena asattheneva danto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I was not able to tame him with the rod and the sword, but the Buddha tamed him without rod or sword. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handa ca dāni mayaṃ, bhante, gacchāma; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well, now, sir, I must go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahukiccā mayaṃ bahukaraṇīyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have many duties, and much to do.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassadāni, mahārāja, kālaṃ maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, great king, go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Aṅgulimāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo sāvatthiyaṃ sapadānaṃ piṇḍāya caramāno aññataraṃ itthiṃ mūḷhagabbhaṃ vighātagabbhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then as he was wandering indiscriminately for alms-food he saw a woman undergoing a painful obstructed labor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvānassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, it occurred to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kilissanti vata, bho, sattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Oh, beings suffer such filth! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kilissanti vata, bho, sattā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Oh, beings suffer such filth!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then after wandering for alms in Sāvatthī, after the meal, on his return from alms-round, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idhāhaṃ, bhante, pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, sāvatthiyaṃ sapadānaṃ piṇḍāya caramāno aññataraṃ itthiṃ mūḷhagabbhaṃ vighātagabbhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna mayhaṃ etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kilissanti vata bho sattā, kilissanti vata bho sattā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi tvaṃ, aṅgulimāla, yena sā itthī tenupasaṅkama; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ itthiṃ evaṃ vadehi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Aṅgulimāla, go to that woman and say this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yatohaṃ, bhagini, jāto nābhijānāmi sañcicca pāṇaṃ jīvitā voropetā, tena saccena sotthi te hotu, sotthi gabbhassā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Ever since I was born, sister, I don’t recall having intentionally taken the life of a living creature. By this truth, may both you and your baby be safe.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“So hi nūna me, bhante, sampajānamusāvādo bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, wouldn’t that be telling a deliberate lie? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayā hi, bhante, bahū sañcicca pāṇā jīvitā voropitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I have intentionally killed many living creatures.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi tvaṃ, aṅgulimāla, yena sā itthī tenupasaṅkama; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ itthiṃ evaṃ vadehi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, Aṅgulimāla, go to that woman and say this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yatohaṃ, bhagini, ariyāya jātiyā jāto, nābhijānāmi sañcicca pāṇaṃ jīvitā voropetā, tena saccena sotthi te hotu, sotthi gabbhassā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Ever since I was born in the noble birth, sister, I don’t recall having intentionally taken the life of a living creature. By this truth, may both you and your baby be safe.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo bhagavato paṭissutvā yena sā itthī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ itthiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Aṅgulimāla. He went to that woman and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yatohaṃ, bhagini, ariyāya jātiyā jāto, nābhijānāmi sañcicca pāṇaṃ jīvitā voropetā, tena saccena sotthi te hotu, sotthi gabbhassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ever since I was born in the noble birth, sister, I don’t recall having intentionally taken the life of a living creature. By this truth, may both you and your baby be safe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha khvāssā itthiyā sotthi ahosi, sotthi gabbhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that woman was safe, and so was her baby. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto viharanto nacirasseva—yassatthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṃ—brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Aṅgulimāla, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā”ti abbhaññāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is no return to any state of existence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro kho panāyasmā aṅgulimālo arahataṃ ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Aṅgulimāla became one of the perfected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Aṅgulimāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññenapi leḍḍu khitto āyasmato aṅgulimālassa kāye nipatati, aññenapi daṇḍo khitto āyasmato aṅgulimālassa kāye nipatati, aññenapi sakkharā khittā āyasmato aṅgulimālassa kāye nipatati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time someone threw a stone that hit Aṅgulimāla, someone else threw a stick, and someone else threw gravel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo bhinnena sīsena, lohitena gaḷantena, bhinnena pattena, vipphālitāya saṅghāṭiyā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Aṅgulimāla—with cracked head, bleeding, his bowl broken, and his outer robe torn—went to the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ aṅgulimālaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha saw him coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna āyasmantaṃ aṅgulimālaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“adhivāsehi tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, adhivāsehi tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Endure it, brahmin! Endure it, brahmin! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kho tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, kammassa vipākena bahūni vassāni bahūni vassasatāni bahūni vassasahassāni niraye pacceyyāsi tassa tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, kammassa vipākaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme paṭisaṃvedesī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re experiencing in this life the result of deeds that might have caused you to be tormented in hell for many years, many hundreds or thousands of years.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo rahogato paṭisallīno vimuttisukhaṃ paṭisaṃvedi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Later, Venerable Aṅgulimāla was experiencing the bliss of release while in private retreat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On that occasion he was inspired to exclaim: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pubbeva pamajjitvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Someone who was heedless before, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pacchā so nappamajjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and afterwards is not, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Somaṃ lokaṃ pabhāseti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">lights up the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abbhā muttova candimā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the moon freed from a cloud. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa pāpaṃ kataṃ kammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who, with skillful deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kusalena pidhīyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">shuts the door on bad things they’ve done, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Somaṃ lokaṃ pabhāseti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">lights up the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abbhā muttova candimā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the moon freed from a cloud. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo have daharo bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A young mendicant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yuñjati buddhasāsane; </span></p>
<p class="p3">devoted to the teaching of the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Somaṃ lokaṃ pabhāseti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">lights up the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abbhā muttova candimā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the moon freed from a cloud. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disā hi me dhammakathaṃ suṇantu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">May even my enemies hear a Dhamma talk! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disā hi me yuñjantu buddhasāsane; </span></p>
<p class="p3">May even my enemies devote themselves to the Buddha’s teaching! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disā hi me te manujā bhajantu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">May even my enemies associate with those good people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye dhammamevādapayanti santo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who establish others in the Dhamma! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disā hi me khantivādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">May even my enemies hear Dhamma at the right time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avirodhappasaṃsīnaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">from those who speak on acceptance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇantu dhammaṃ kālena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">praising acquiescence; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tañca anuvidhīyantu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and may they follow that path! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi jātu so mamaṃ hiṃse, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For then they’d surely wish no harm </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṃ vā pana kiñci naṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">upon myself or others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pappuyya paramaṃ santiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having arrived at ultimate peace, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rakkheyya tasathāvare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’d look after creatures firm and frail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakañhi nayanti nettikā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For irrigators guide the water, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Usukārā namayanti tejanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and fletchers straighten arrows; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dāruṃ namayanti tacchakā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">carpenters carve timber—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attānaṃ damayanti paṇḍitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but the astute tame themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daṇḍeneke damayanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some tame by using the rod, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅkusehi kasāhi ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">some with goads, and some with whips. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaṇḍena asatthena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the poised one tamed me </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahaṃ dantomhi tādinā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">without rod or sword. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahiṃsakoti me nāmaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">My name is ‘Harmless’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hiṃsakassa pure sato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">though I used to be harmful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjāhaṃ saccanāmomhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The name I bear today is true, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na naṃ hiṃsāmi kiñci naṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for I do no harm to anyone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Coro ahaṃ pure āsiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I used to be a bandit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅgulimāloti vissuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the notorious Aṅgulimāla. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuyhamāno mahoghena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Swept away in a great flood, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhaṃ saraṇamāgamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went to the Buddha as a refuge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lohitapāṇi pure āsiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I used to have blood on my hands, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅgulimāloti vissuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the notorious Aṅgulimāla. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saraṇagamanaṃ passa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">See the refuge I’ve found—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavanetti samūhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the attachment to rebirth is eradicated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tādisaṃ kammaṃ katvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve done many of the sort of deeds </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahuṃ duggatigāminaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that lead to a bad destination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phuṭṭho kammavipākena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The result of my deeds has already hit me, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṇaṇo bhuñjāmi bhojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so I enjoy my food free of debt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamādamanuyuñjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fools and unintelligent people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bālā dummedhino janā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">devote themselves to negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamādañca medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the intelligent protect diligence </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhanaṃ seṭṭhaṃva rakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as their best treasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā pamādamanuyuñjetha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t devote yourself to negligence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā kāmarati santhavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or delight in sexual intimacy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamatto hi jhāyanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For if you’re diligent and practice absorption, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pappoti vipulaṃ sukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll attain abundant happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svāgataṃ nāpagataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It was welcome, not unwelcome, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nayidaṃ dummantitaṃ mama; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the advice I got was good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃvibhattesu dhammesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of teachings that are shared, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ seṭṭhaṃ tadupāgamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I encountered the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svāgataṃ nāpagataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It was welcome, not unwelcome, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nayidaṃ dummantitaṃ mama; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the advice I got was good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tisso vijjā anuppattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve attained the three knowledges </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kataṃ buddhassa sāsanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and fulfilled the Buddha’s instructions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṅgulimālasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
