<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.042-51-42  - 42 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.042-51. 42  - 42 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Parisavagga  - 5. Assemblies </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttānā ca parisā gambhīrā ca parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A shallow assembly and a deep assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, uttānā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a shallow assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū uddhatā honti unnaḷā capalā mukharā vikiṇṇavācā muṭṭhassatī asampajānā asamāhitā vibbhantacittā pākatindriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants are restless, insolent, fickle, gossipy, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, uttānā parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a shallow assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, gambhīrā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a deep assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū anuddhatā honti anunnaḷā acapalā amukharā avikiṇṇavācā upaṭṭhitassatī sampajānā samāhitā ekaggacittā saṃvutindriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants are not restless, insolent, fickle, gossipy, or loose-tongued, but have established mindfulness, situational awareness, immersion, unified minds, and restrained faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, gambhīrā parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a deep assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ gambhīrā parisā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the deep assembly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">43 </span></p>
<p class="p3">43 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaggā ca parisā samaggā ca parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A divided assembly and a harmonious assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, vaggā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a divided assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū bhaṇḍanajātā kalahajātā vivādāpannā aññamaññaṃ mukhasattīhi vitudantā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants argue, quarrel, and fight, continually wounding each other with barbed words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vaggā parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a divided assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, samaggā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a harmonious assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū samaggā sammodamānā avivadamānā khīrodakībhūtā aññamaññaṃ piyacakkhūhi sampassantā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants live in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, samaggā parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a harmonious assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ samaggā parisā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the harmonious assembly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">44 </span></p>
<p class="p3">44 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaggavatī ca parisā aggavatī ca parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly of the worst and an assembly of the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, anaggavatī parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly of the worst? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ therā bhikkhū bāhulikā honti sāthalikā, okkamane pubbaṅgamā, paviveke nikkhittadhurā, na vīriyaṃ ārabhanti appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ pacchimā janatā diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who come after follow their example. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāpi hoti bāhulikā sāthalikā, okkamane pubbaṅgamā, paviveke nikkhittadhurā, na vīriyaṃ ārabhati appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They too become indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, anaggavatī parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly of the worst. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, aggavatī parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly of the best? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ therā bhikkhū na bāhulikā honti na sāthalikā, okkamane nikkhittadhurā, paviveke pubbaṅgamā, vīriyaṃ ārabhanti appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the senior mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ pacchimā janatā diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who come after follow their example. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāpi hoti na bāhulikā na sāthalikā, okkamane nikkhittadhurā, paviveke pubbaṅgamā, vīriyaṃ ārabhati appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They too are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, aggavatī parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly of the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ aggavatī parisā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the assembly of the best.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">45 </span></p>
<p class="p3">45 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anariyā ca parisā ariyā ca parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An ignoble assembly and a noble assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, anariyā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an ignoble assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants don’t truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, anariyā parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an ignoble assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, ariyā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a noble assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyā parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a noble assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ ariyā parisā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the noble assembly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">46 </span></p>
<p class="p3">46 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisākasaṭo ca parisāmaṇḍo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly of the dregs and an assembly of the cream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, parisākasaṭo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly of the dregs? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū chandāgatiṃ gacchanti, dosāgatiṃ gacchanti, mohāgatiṃ gacchanti, bhayāgatiṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, parisākasaṭo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly of the dregs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, parisāmaṇḍo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly of the cream? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū na chandāgatiṃ gacchanti, na dosāgatiṃ gacchanti, na mohāgatiṃ gacchanti, na bhayāgatiṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants make decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, parisāmaṇḍo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly of the cream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ parisāmaṇḍo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the assembly of the cream.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">47 </span></p>
<p class="p3">47 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Okkācitavinītā parisā nopaṭipucchāvinītā, paṭipucchāvinītā parisā nookkācitavinītā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly educated in fancy talk, not in questioning, and an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, okkācitavinītā parisā nopaṭipucchāvinītā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly educated in fancy talk, not in questioning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū ye te suttantā tathāgatabhāsitā gambhīrā gambhīratthā lokuttarā suññatāpaṭisaṃyuttā tesu bhaññamānesu na sussūsanti na sotaṃ odahanti na aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhapenti na ca te dhamme uggahetabbaṃ pariyāpuṇitabbaṃ maññanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is an assembly where, when discourses spoken by the Realized One—deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness—are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They don’t pay attention or apply their minds to understand them, nor do they think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye pana te suttantā kavitā kāveyyā cittakkharā cittabyañjanā bāhirakā sāvakabhāsitā tesu bhaññamānesu sussūsanti sotaṃ odahanti aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhapenti, te dhamme uggahetabbaṃ pariyāpuṇitabbaṃ maññanti, te ca taṃ dhammaṃ pariyāpuṇitvā na ceva aññamaññaṃ paṭipucchanti na ca paṭivicaranti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when discourses composed by poets—poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by outsiders or spoken by disciples—are being recited the mendicants do want to listen. They pay attention and apply their minds to understand them, and they think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when they’ve learned those teachings they don’t question or examine each other, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ kathaṃ, imassa ko attho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Why does it say this? What does that mean?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te avivaṭañceva na vivaranti, anuttānīkatañca na uttānīkaronti, anekavihitesu ca kaṅkhāṭhāniyesu dhammesu kaṅkhaṃ na paṭivinodenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they don’t clarify what is unclear, or reveal what is obscure, or dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, okkācitavinītā parisā no paṭipucchāvinītā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly educated in fancy talk, not in questioning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, paṭipucchāvinītā parisā nookkācitavinītā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū ye te suttantā kavitā kāveyyā cittakkharā cittabyañjanā bāhirakā sāvakabhāsitā tesu bhaññamānesu na sussūsanti na sotaṃ odahanti na aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhapenti, na ca te dhamme uggahetabbaṃ pariyāpuṇitabbaṃ maññanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is an assembly where, when discourses composed by poets—poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by outsiders or spoken by disciples—are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They don’t pay attention or apply their minds to understand them, nor do they think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye pana te suttantā tathāgatabhāsitā gambhīrā gambhīratthā lokuttarā suññatāpaṭisaṃyuttā tesu bhaññamānesu sussūsanti sotaṃ odahanti aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhapenti, te ca dhamme uggahetabbaṃ pariyāpuṇitabbaṃ maññanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when discourses spoken by the Realized One—deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness—are being recited the mendicants do want to listen. They pay attention and apply their minds to understand them, and they think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ dhammaṃ pariyāpuṇitvā aññamaññaṃ paṭipucchanti paṭivicaranti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when they’ve learned those teachings they question and examine each other, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ kathaṃ, imassa ko attho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Why does it say this? What does that mean?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te avivaṭañceva vivaranti, anuttānīkatañca uttānīkaronti, anekavihitesu ca kaṅkhāṭhāniyesu dhammesu kaṅkhaṃ paṭivinodenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they clarify what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, paṭipucchāvinītā parisā nookkācitavinītā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ paṭipucchāvinītā parisā nookkācitavinītā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">48 </span></p>
<p class="p3">48 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisagaru parisā no saddhammagaru, saddhammagaru parisā no āmisagaru. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly that values material things, not the true teaching, and an assembly that values the true teaching, not material things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, āmisagaru parisā no saddhammagaru? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly that values material things, not the true teaching? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū gihīnaṃ odātavasanānaṃ sammukhā aññamaññassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is an assembly where the mendicants praise each other in front of the white-clothed laypeople, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asuko bhikkhu ubhatobhāgavimutto, asuko paññāvimutto, asuko kāyasakkhī, asuko diṭṭhippatto, asuko saddhāvimutto, asuko dhammānusārī, asuko saddhānusārī, asuko sīlavā kalyāṇadhammo, asuko dussīlo pāpadhammo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The mendicant so-and-so is freed both ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a personal witness; so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith; so-and-so is a follower of the teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith; so-and-so is ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad character.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tena lābhaṃ labhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way they get material things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ lābhaṃ labhitvā gathitā mucchitā ajjhopannā anādīnavadassāvino anissaraṇapaññā paribhuñjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when they get these things, they use them tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, āmisagaru parisā no saddhammagaru. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly that values material things, not the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, saddhammagaru parisā noāmisagaru? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly that values the true teaching, not material things? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū gihīnaṃ odātavasanānaṃ sammukhā aññamaññassa vaṇṇaṃ na bhāsanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is an assembly where the mendicants don’t praise each other in front of the white-clothed laypeople, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asuko bhikkhu ubhatobhāgavimutto, asuko paññāvimutto, asuko kāyasakkhī, asuko diṭṭhippatto, asuko saddhāvimutto, asuko dhammānusārī, asuko saddhānusārī, asuko sīlavā kalyāṇadhammo, asuko dussīlo pāpadhammo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The mendicant so-and-so is freed both ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a personal witness; so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith; so-and-so is a follower of the teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith; so-and-so is ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad character.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tena lābhaṃ labhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way they get material things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ lābhaṃ labhitvā agathitā amucchitā anajjhosannā ādīnavadassāvino nissaraṇapaññā paribhuñjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when they get these things, they use them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, saddhammagaru parisā noāmisagaru. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly that values the true teaching, not material things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ saddhammagaru parisā noāmisagarū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the assembly that values the true teaching, not material things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">49 </span></p>
<p class="p3">49 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visamā ca parisā samā ca parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An unjust assembly and a just assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, visamā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an unjust assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ adhammakammāni pavattanti dhammakammāni nappavattanti, avinayakammāni pavattanti vinayakammāni nappavattanti, adhammakammāni dippanti dhammakammāni na dippanti, avinayakammāni dippanti vinayakammāni na dippanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where legal acts against the teaching proceed, while legal acts in line with the teaching don’t proceed. Legal acts against the training proceed, while legal acts in line with the training don’t proceed. Legal acts against the teaching are explained, while legal acts in line with the teaching aren’t explained. Legal acts against the training are explained, while legal acts in line with the training aren’t explained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, visamā parisā. () </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an unjust assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, samā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a just assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ dhammakammāni pavattanti adhammakammāni nappavattanti, vinayakammāni pavattanti avinayakammāni nappavattanti, dhammakammāni dippanti adhammakammāni na dippanti, vinayakammāni dippanti avinayakammāni na dippanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where legal acts in line with the teaching proceed, while legal acts against the teaching don’t proceed. Legal acts in line with the training proceed, while legal acts against the training don’t proceed. Legal acts in line with the teaching are explained, while legal acts against the teaching aren’t explained. Legal acts in line with the training are explained, while legal acts against the training aren’t explained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, samā parisā. () </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a just assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ samā parisā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the just assembly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">50 </span></p>
<p class="p3">50 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammikā ca parisā dhammikā ca parisā … pe … imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An unprincipled assembly and a principled assembly … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammikā parisā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the principled assembly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">51 </span></p>
<p class="p3">51 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammavādinī ca parisā dhammavādinī ca parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly with unprincipled speech, and an assembly with principled speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, adhammavādinī parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly with unprincipled speech? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū adhikaraṇaṃ ādiyanti dhammikaṃ vā adhammikaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is an assembly where the mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ adhikaraṇaṃ ādiyitvā na ceva aññamaññaṃ saññāpenti na ca saññattiṃ upagacchanti, na ca nijjhāpenti na ca nijjhattiṃ upagacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, nor do they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te asaññattibalā anijjhattibalā appaṭinissaggamantino tameva adhikaraṇaṃ thāmasā parāmāsā abhinivissa voharanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Unable to persuade or convince each other, they can’t let go of their opinions. They obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue, insisting that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idameva saccaṃ moghamaññan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the only truth, other ideas are silly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, adhammavādinī parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly with unprincipled speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, dhammavādinī parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly with principled speech? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū adhikaraṇaṃ ādiyanti dhammikaṃ vā adhammikaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is an assembly where the mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ adhikaraṇaṃ ādiyitvā aññamaññaṃ saññāpenti ceva saññattiñca upagacchanti, nijjhāpenti ceva nijjhattiñca upagacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, and they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te saññattibalā nijjhattibalā paṭinissaggamantino, na tameva adhikaraṇaṃ thāmasā parāmāsā abhinivissa voharanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since they are able to persuade and convince each other, they let go of their opinions. They don’t obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue or insist that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idameva saccaṃ moghamaññan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the only truth, other ideas are silly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhammavādinī parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly with principled speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ parisānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammavādinī parisā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two assemblies is the assembly with principled speech.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttānā vaggā aggavatī, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyā kasaṭo ca pañcamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Okkācitaāmisañceva, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visamā adhammādhammiyena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamo paṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
