<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.021-31-21  - 21 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.021-31. 21  - 21 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Bālavagga  - 3. Fools </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, bālā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are two fools. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca accayaṃ accayato na passati, yo ca accayaṃ desentassa yathādhammaṃ nappaṭiggaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who doesn’t recognize when they’ve made a mistake. And one who doesn’t properly accept the confession of someone who’s made a mistake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve bālāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two fools. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dveme, bhikkhave, paṇḍitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are two who are astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca accayaṃ accayato passati, yo ca accayaṃ desentassa yathādhammaṃ paṭiggaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who recognizes when they’ve made a mistake. And one who properly accepts the confession of someone who’s made a mistake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve paṇḍitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two who are astute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">22 </span></p>
<p class="p3">22 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, tathāgataṃ abbhācikkhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭho vā dosantaro, saddho vā duggahitena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who is hateful and hides it, and one whose faith is mistaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve tathāgataṃ abbhācikkhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These two misrepresent the Realized One.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">23 </span></p>
<p class="p3">23 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, tathāgataṃ abbhācikkhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca abhāsitaṃ alapitaṃ tathāgatena bhāsitaṃ lapitaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpeti, yo ca bhāsitaṃ lapitaṃ tathāgatena abhāsitaṃ alapitaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who explains what was not spoken by the Realized One as spoken by him. And one who explains what was spoken by the Realized One as not spoken by him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve tathāgataṃ abbhācikkhantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These two misrepresent the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dveme, bhikkhave, tathāgataṃ nābbhācikkhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These two don’t misrepresent the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca abhāsitaṃ alapitaṃ tathāgatena abhāsitaṃ alapitaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpeti, yo ca bhāsitaṃ lapitaṃ tathāgatena bhāsitaṃ lapitaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who explains what was not spoken by the Realized One as not spoken by him. And one who explains what was spoken by the Realized One as spoken by him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve tathāgataṃ nābbhācikkhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These two don’t misrepresent the Realized One.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">24 </span></p>
<p class="p3">24 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, tathāgataṃ abbhācikkhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca neyyatthaṃ suttantaṃ nītattho suttantoti dīpeti, yo ca nītatthaṃ suttantaṃ neyyattho suttantoti dīpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who explains a discourse in need of interpretation as a discourse whose meaning is explicit. And one who explains a discourse whose meaning is explicit as a discourse in need of interpretation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve tathāgataṃ abbhācikkhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These two misrepresent the Realized One.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">25 </span></p>
<p class="p3">25 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, tathāgataṃ nābbhācikkhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These two don’t misrepresent the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca neyyatthaṃ suttantaṃ neyyattho suttantoti dīpeti, yo ca nītatthaṃ suttantaṃ nītattho suttantoti dīpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who explains a discourse in need of interpretation as a discourse in need of interpretation. And one who explains a discourse whose meaning is explicit as a discourse whose meaning is explicit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve tathāgataṃ nābbhācikkhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These two don’t misrepresent the Realized One.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">26 </span></p>
<p class="p3">26 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭicchannakammantassa, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ gatīnaṃ aññatarā gati pāṭikaṅkhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when you hide your misdeeds, you can expect one of two destinies: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirayo vā tiracchānayoni vāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">hell or the animal realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭicchannakammantassa, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ gatīnaṃ aññatarā gati pāṭikaṅkhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When you don’t hide your misdeeds, you can expect one of two destinies: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devā vā manussā vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a god or a human.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">27 </span></p>
<p class="p3">27 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Micchādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ gatīnaṃ aññatarā gati pāṭikaṅkhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when you have wrong view, you can expect one of two destinies: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirayo vā tiracchānayoni vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">hell or the animal realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">28 </span></p>
<p class="p3">28 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ gatīnaṃ aññatarā gati pāṭikaṅkhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when you have right view, you can expect one of two destinies: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devā vā manussā vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a god or a human.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">29 </span></p>
<p class="p3">29 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dussīlassa, bhikkhave, dve paṭiggāhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are two places waiting to receive an unethical person: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirayo vā tiracchānayoni vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">hell and the animal realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavato, bhikkhave, dve paṭiggāhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are two places waiting to receive an ethical person: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devā vā manussā vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the realms of gods and humans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">30 </span></p>
<p class="p3">30 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, atthavase sampassamāno araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I see two reasons to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attano ca diṭṭhadhammasukhavihāraṃ sampassamāno, pacchimañca janataṃ anukampamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing a happy life for oneself in the present, and having compassion for future generations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho ahaṃ, bhikkhave, dve atthavase sampassamāno araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I see two reasons to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">31 </span></p>
<p class="p3">31 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dve me, bhikkhave, dhammā vijjābhāgiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These two things play a part in realization. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samatho ca vipassanā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Serenity and discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samatho, bhikkhave, bhāvito kamatthamanubhoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the benefit of developing serenity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ bhāvīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind is developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ bhāvitaṃ kamatthamanubhoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the benefit of developing the mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo rāgo so pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed is given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vipassanā, bhikkhave, bhāvitā kamatthamanubhoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the benefit of developing discernment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññā bhāvīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wisdom is developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññā bhāvitā kamatthamanubhoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the benefit of developing wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā avijjā sā pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgupakkiliṭṭhaṃ vā, bhikkhave, cittaṃ na vimuccati, avijjupakkiliṭṭhā vā paññā na bhāvīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind contaminated by greed is not free; and wisdom contaminated by ignorance does not grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, rāgavirāgā cetovimutti, avijjāvirāgā paññāvimuttī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way, freedom of heart comes from the fading away of greed, while freedom by wisdom comes from the fading away of ignorance.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bālavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
