<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.151-162-151  - 151 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.151-162. 151  - 151 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Santhāravagga  - 14. Welcome </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, santhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these two kinds of welcome. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisasanthāro ca dhammasanthāro ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Welcome in material things and welcome in the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve santhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two kinds of welcome. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imesaṃ dvinnaṃ santhārānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammasanthāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two kinds of welcome is the welcome in the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">152 </span></p>
<p class="p3">152 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, paṭisanthārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these two kinds of hospitality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisapaṭisanthāro ca dhammapaṭisanthāro ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hospitality in material things and hospitality in the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve paṭisanthārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two kinds of hospitality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imesaṃ dvinnaṃ paṭisanthārānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammapaṭisanthāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two kinds of hospitality is hospitality in the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">153 </span></p>
<p class="p3">153 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, esanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these two quests. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisesanā ca dhammesanā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The quest for material things and the quest for the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve esanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two quests. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ esanānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammesanā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two quests is the quest for the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">154 </span></p>
<p class="p3">154 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, pariyesanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these two searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisapariyesanā ca dhammapariyesanā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The search for material things and the search for the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve pariyesanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ pariyesanānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammapariyesanā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two searches is the search for the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">155 </span></p>
<p class="p3">155 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, pariyeṭṭhiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these two kinds of seeking. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisapariyeṭṭhi ca dhammapariyeṭṭhi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeking for material things and seeking for the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve pariyeṭṭhiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two kinds of seeking. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ pariyeṭṭhīnaṃ yadidaṃ dhammapariyeṭṭhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two kinds of seeking is seeking for the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">156 </span></p>
<p class="p3">156 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, pūjā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these two kinds of worship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisapūjā ca dhammapūjā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Worship of material things and worship of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve pūjā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two kinds of worship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ pūjānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammapūjā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two kinds of worship is worship of the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">157 </span></p>
<p class="p3">157 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemāni, bhikkhave, ātitheyyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these two ways of serving guests. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisātitheyyañca dhammātitheyyañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Serving guests with material things and serving guests with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dve ātitheyyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two ways of serving guests. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imesaṃ dvinnaṃ ātitheyyānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammātitheyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two ways of serving guests is to serve them with the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">158 </span></p>
<p class="p3">158 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, iddhiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two successes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisiddhi ca dhammiddhi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Success in material things and success in the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve iddhiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two successes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ iddhīnaṃ yadidaṃ dhammiddhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two successes is success in the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">159 </span></p>
<p class="p3">159 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemā, bhikkhave, vuddhiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of growth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisavuddhi ca dhammavuddhi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Growth in material things and growth in the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, dve vuddhiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two kinds of growth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imāsaṃ dvinnaṃ vuddhīnaṃ yadidaṃ dhammavuddhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two kinds of growth is growth in the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">160 </span></p>
<p class="p3">160 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemāni, bhikkhave, ratanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these two treasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisaratanañca dhammaratanañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The treasure of material things and the treasure of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dve ratanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two treasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imesaṃ dvinnaṃ ratanānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammaratanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two treasures is the treasure of the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">161 </span></p>
<p class="p3">161 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, sannicayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these two kinds of accumulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisasannicayo ca dhammasannicayo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Accumulation of material things and accumulation of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve sannicayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two kinds of accumulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imesaṃ dvinnaṃ sannicayānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammasannicayo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two kinds of accumulation is the accumulation of the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">162 </span></p>
<p class="p3">162 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvemāni, bhikkhave, vepullāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of increase. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisavepullañca dhammavepullañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Increase in material things and increase in the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dve vepullāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two kinds of increase. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, imesaṃ dvinnaṃ vepullānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammavepullan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The better of these two kinds of increase is increase in the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santhāravaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
