<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.117-117. Bandhanasutta  - 117. Shackles </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.117. 117. Bandhanasutta  - 117. Shackles </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Dhammakathikavagga  - 12. A Dhamma speaker </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṃ adassāvī … pe … sappurisadhamme avinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, take an uneducated ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ attato samanupassati, rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; attani vā rūpaṃ, rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano rūpabandhanabaddho santarabāhirabandhanabaddho atīradassī apāradassī, baddho jīyati baddho mīyati baddho asmā lokā paraṃ lokaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re called an uneducated ordinary person who is bound to form, inside and out. They see neither the near shore nor the far shore. They’re born in bonds and die in bonds, and in bonds they go from this world to the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanaṃ attato samanupassati … pe … vedanāya vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano vedanābandhanabaddho santarabāhirabandhanabaddho atīradassī apāradassī, baddho jīyati baddho mīyati baddho asmā lokā paraṃ lokaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness as self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano viññāṇabandhanabaddho santarabāhirabandhanabaddho atīradassī apāradassī, baddho jīyati baddho mīyati baddho asmā lokā paraṃ lokaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re called an uneducated ordinary person who is bound to consciousness, inside and out. They see neither the near shore nor the far shore. They’re born in bonds and die in bonds, and in bonds they go from this world to the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutavā ca kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ariyānaṃ dassāvī … pe … sappurisadhamme suvinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">An educated noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na rūpaṃ attato samanupassati, na rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; na attani vā rūpaṃ, na rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako na rūpabandhanabaddho, na santarabāhirabandhanabaddho, tīradassī, pāradassī; ‘parimutto so dukkhasmā’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re called an educated noble disciple who is not bound to form, inside or out. They see the near shore and the far shore. They’re exempt from suffering, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na vedanaṃ attato … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saññaṃ attato … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saṅkhāre attato … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness as self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako na viññāṇabandhanabaddho, na santarabāhirabandhanabaddho, tīradassī, pāradassī, ‘parimutto so dukkhasmā’ti vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re called an educated noble disciple who is not bound to consciousness, inside or out. They see the near shore and the far shore. They’re exempt from suffering, I say.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
