<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.102-102. Aniccasaññāsutta  - 102. The Perception of Impermanence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.102. 102. Aniccasaññāsutta  - 102. The Perception of Impermanence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Pupphavagga  - 10. Flowers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccasaññā, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā sabbaṃ kāmarāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ rūparāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ bhavarāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ avijjaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when the perception of impermanence is developed and cultivated it eliminates all desire for sensual pleasures, for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, and for rebirth in a future life. It eliminates all ignorance and eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, saradasamaye kassako mahānaṅgalena kasanto sabbāni mūlasantānakāni sampadālento kasati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the autumn, a farmer ploughing with a large plough shears through all the root networks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā sabbaṃ kāmarāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ rūparāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ bhavarāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ avijjaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, pabbajalāyako pabbajaṃ lāyitvā agge gahetvā odhunāti niddhunāti nicchoṭeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A reed-cutter, having cut the reeds, grabs them at the top and shakes them down, shakes them about, and shakes them off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā sabbaṃ kāmarāgaṃ pariyādiyati … pe … sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ambapiṇḍiyā vaṇṭacchinnāya yāni tattha ambāni vaṇṭapaṭibandhāni sabbāni tāni tadanvayāni bhavanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the stalk of a bunch of mangoes is cut, all the mangoes attached to the stalk will follow along. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā … pe … sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kūṭāgārassa yā kāci gopānasiyo sabbā tā kūṭaṅgamā kūṭaninnā kūṭasamosaraṇā, kūṭaṃ tāsaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā … pe … sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci mūlagandhā kāḷānusārigandho tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci sāragandhā, lohitacandanaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci pupphagandhā, vassikaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci kuṭṭarājāno, sabbete rañño cakkavattissa anuyantā bhavanti, rājā tesaṃ cakkavatti aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yā kāci tārakarūpānaṃ pabhā, sabbā tā candimappabhāya kalaṃ nāgghanti soḷasiṃ, candappabhā tāsaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the moon’s radiance, so the moon’s radiance is said to be the best of them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, saradasamaye viddhe vigatavalāhake deve ādicco nataṃ abbhussakkamāno, sabbaṃ ākāsagataṃ tamagataṃ abhivihacca bhāsate ca tapate ca virocate ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">After the rainy season the sky is clear and cloudless. And when the sun rises, it dispels all the darkness from the sky as it shines and glows and radiates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā sabbaṃ kāmarāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ rūparāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ bhavarāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ avijjaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed and cultivated it eliminates all desire for sensual pleasures, for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, and for rebirth in a future life. It eliminates all ignorance and eradicates all conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā kathaṃ bahulīkatā sabbaṃ kāmarāgaṃ pariyādiyati … pe … sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is the perception of impermanence developed and cultivated so that … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Iti rūpaṃ, iti rūpassa samudayo, iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti viññāṇaṃ, iti viññāṇassa samudayo, iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamo’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā evaṃ bahulīkatā sabbaṃ kāmarāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ rūparāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ bhavarāgaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ avijjaṃ pariyādiyati, sabbaṃ asmimānaṃ samūhanatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the perception of impermanence is developed and cultivated so that it eliminates all desire for sensual pleasures, for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, and for rebirth in a future life. That’s how it eliminates all ignorance and eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pupphavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nadī pupphañca pheṇañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gomayañca nakhāsikhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suddhikaṃ dve ca gaddulā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsījaṭaṃ aniccatāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majjhimapaṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upayo arahanto ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khajjanī therasavhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pupphavaggena paṇṇāsa, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dutiyo tena vuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
