<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.082-82. Puṇṇamasutta  - 82. A Full Moon Night </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.082. 82. Puṇṇamasutta  - 82. A Full Moon Night </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Khajjanīyavagga  - 8. Itchy </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā tadahuposathe pannarase puṇṇāya puṇṇamāya rattiyā bhikkhusaṃghaparivuto ajjhokāse nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the full moon on the fifteenth day—and the Buddha was sitting surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then one of the mendicants got up from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, raised their joined palms toward the Buddha, and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“puccheyyāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ kiñcideva desaṃ, sace me bhagavā okāsaṃ karoti pañhassa veyyākaraṇāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’d like to ask the Buddha about a certain point, if you’d take the time to answer.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, sake āsane nisīditvā puccha yadākaṅkhasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, mendicant, take your own seat and ask what you wish.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato paṭissutvā sake āsane nisīditvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied that mendicant. He took his seat and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ime nu kho, bhante, pañcupādānakkhandhā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, are these the five grasping aggregates, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ime kho, bhikkhu, pañcupādānakkhandhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, they are,” replied the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—rūpupādānakkhandho … pe … viññāṇupādānakkhandho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā bhagavantaṃ uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ime kho pana, bhante, pañcupādānakkhandhā kiṃmūlakā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what is the root of these five grasping aggregates?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ime kho, bhikkhu, pañcupādānakkhandhā chandamūlakā”ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These five grasping aggregates are rooted in desire.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taññeva nu kho, bhante, upādānaṃ te pañcupādānakkhandhā udāhu aññatra pañcahi upādānakkhandhehi upādānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, is that grasping the exact same thing as the five grasping aggregates? Or is grasping one thing and the five grasping aggregates another?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, bhikkhu, taññeva upādānaṃ te pañcupādānakkhandhā nāpi aññatra pañcahi upādānakkhandhehi upādānaṃ, api ca yo tattha chandarāgo taṃ tattha upādānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Neither. Rather, the desire and greed for them is the grasping there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā pana, bhante, pañcupādānakkhandhesu chandarāgavemattatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, can there be different kinds of desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā, bhikkhū”ti bhagavā avoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There can,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha, bhikkhu, ekaccassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when someone thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃrūpo siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃvedano siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃsañño siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃsaṅkhāro siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃviññāṇo siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In the future, may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such choices, or such consciousness!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, siyā pañcupādānakkhandhesu chandarāgavemattatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how there can be different kinds of desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, khandhānaṃ khandhādhivacanan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the scope of the term ‘aggregates’ as applied to the aggregates?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kiñci, bhikkhu, rūpaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā, ayaṃ vuccati rūpakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of feeling at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of perception at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of choices at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā, ayaṃ vuccati viññāṇakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, bhikkhu, khandhānaṃ khandhādhivacanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the scope of the term ‘aggregates’ as applied to the aggregates.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo rūpakkhandhassa paññāpanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the aggregate of form is found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko hetu ko paccayo vedanākkhandhassa paññāpanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the cause, what is the reason why the aggregate of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko hetu ko paccayo saññākkhandhassa paññāpanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko hetu ko paccayo saṅkhārakkhandhassa paññāpanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko hetu ko paccayo viññāṇakkhandhassa paññāpanāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness is found?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattāro kho, bhikkhu, mahābhūtā hetu, cattāro mahābhūtā paccayo rūpakkhandhassa paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The four primary elements are the reason why the aggregate of form is found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phasso hetu phasso paccayo vedanākkhandhassa paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contact is the reason why the aggregates of feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phasso hetu phasso paccayo saññākkhandhassa paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phasso hetu, phasso paccayo saṅkhārakkhandhassa paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and choices are found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpaṃ hetu, nāmarūpaṃ paccayo viññāṇakkhandhassa paññāpanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Name and form are the reasons why the aggregate of consciousness is found.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ nu kho, bhante, sakkāyadiṭṭhi hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how does identity view come about?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṃ adassāvī ariyadhammassa akovido ariyadhamme avinīto, sappurisānaṃ adassāvī sappurisadhammassa akovido sappurisadhamme avinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s because an uneducated ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ attato samanupassati, rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; attani vā rūpaṃ, rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati, viññāṇavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; attani vā viññāṇaṃ, viññāṇasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, sakkāyadiṭṭhi hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how identity view comes about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant … asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ pana, bhante, sakkāyadiṭṭhi na hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how does identity view not come about?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, sutavā ariyasāvako ariyānaṃ dassāvī ariyadhammassa kovido ariyadhamme suvinīto, sappurisānaṃ dassāvī sappurisadhammassa kovido sappurisadhamme suvinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because an educated noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na rūpaṃ attato samanupassati, na rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; na attani vā rūpaṃ, na rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati, na viññāṇavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; na attani vā viññāṇaṃ, na viññāṇasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, sakkāyadiṭṭhi na hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how identity view does not come about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant … asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko nu kho, bhante, rūpassa assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko saṅkhārānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko viññāṇassa assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, bhikkhu, rūpaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ—ayaṃ rūpassa assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ rūpaṃ aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ—ayaṃ rūpassa ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo rūpasmiṃ chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ—idaṃ rūpassa nissaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this is its escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ vedanaṃ paṭicca … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ saññaṃ paṭicca … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye saṅkhāre paṭicca … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ viññāṇaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ—ayaṃ viññāṇassa assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ viññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ—ayaṃ viññāṇassa ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo viññāṇasmiṃ chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ—idaṃ viññāṇassa nissaraṇan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for consciousness: this is its escape.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā bhagavantaṃ uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ nu kho, bhante, jānato, kathaṃ passato imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na hontī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how does one know and see so that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kiñci, bhikkhu, rūpaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā, sabbaṃ rūpaṃ: ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“One truly sees any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly see any kind of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā, sabbaṃ viññāṇaṃ: ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, *all* consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, jānato evaṃ passato imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know and see so that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time one of the mendicants had the thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“iti kira bho rūpaṃ anattā, vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṃ anattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So it seems, good sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattakatāni kammāni kathamattānaṃ phusissantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then what self will the deeds done by not-self affect?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassa bhikkhuno cetasā ceto parivitakkamaññāya bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing what that monk was thinking, addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ idhekacco moghapuriso avidvā avijjāgato taṇhādhipateyyena cetasā satthusāsanaṃ atidhāvitabbaṃ maññeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s possible that some foolish person here—unknowing and ignorant, their mind dominated by craving—thinks they can overstep the teacher’s instructions. They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Iti kira, bho, rūpaṃ anattā, vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṃ anattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘So it seems, good sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anattakatāni kammāni kathamattānaṃ phusissantī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then what self will the deeds done by not-self affect?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭipucchāvinītā kho me tumhe, bhikkhave, tatra tatra tesu tesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, mendicants, you have been educated by me in questioning with regards to all these things in all such cases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suffering, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So you should truly see … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ passaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dve khandhā taññeva siyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Two on the aggregates; exactly the same; and can there be; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhivacanañca hetunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">on the term; and on the cause; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkāyena duve vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">two questions on identity; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assādaviññāṇakena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">gratification; and that with consciousness: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete dasavidhā vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these are the ten questions </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hoti bhikkhu pucchāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mendicant came to ask.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khajjanīyavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assādo dve samudayā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">arahantehi apare dve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīho khajjanī piṇḍolyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pālileyyena puṇṇamāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
