<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.010-10. Kālattayadukkhasutta  - 10. Suffering in the Three Times </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.010. 10. Kālattayadukkhasutta  - 10. Suffering in the Three Times </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nakulapituvagga  - 1. Nakula’s Father </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpaṃ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ atītānāgataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, form of the past and future is suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko pana vādo paccuppannassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not to mention the present. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako atītasmiṃ rūpasmiṃ anapekkho hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn’t worry about past form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgataṃ rūpaṃ nābhinandati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">doesn’t look forward to enjoying future form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccuppannassa rūpassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā dukkhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā dukkhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā dukkhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ dukkhaṃ atītānāgataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness of the past and future is suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko pana vādo paccuppannassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">let alone the present. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako atītasmiṃ viññāṇasmiṃ anapekkho hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn’t worry about past consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgataṃ viññāṇaṃ nābhinandati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">doesn’t look forward to enjoying future consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccuppannassa viññāṇassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present consciousness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
