<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.048-48. Khandhasutta  - 48. Aggregates </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.048. 48. Khandhasutta  - 48. Aggregates </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Attadīpavagga  - 5. Be Your Own Island </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañca, bhikkhave, khandhe desessāmi, pañcupādānakkhandhe ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the five aggregates and the five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, pañcakkhandhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the five aggregates? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kiñci, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā, ayaṃ vuccati rūpakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of feeling at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of perception at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci saṅkhārā atītānāgatapaccuppannā ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikā vā sukhumā vā … pe … ayaṃ vuccati saṅkhārakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of choices at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā, ayaṃ vuccati viññāṇakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, pañcakkhandhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the five aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, pañcupādānakkhandhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the five grasping aggregates? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kiñci, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ … pe … yaṃ dūre santike vā sāsavaṃ upādāniyaṃ, ayaṃ vuccati rūpupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, which is accompanied by defilements and is prone to being grasped: this is called the aggregate of form connected with grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci vedanā … pe … yā dūre santike vā sāsavā upādāniyā, ayaṃ vuccati vedanupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of feeling at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci saññā … pe … yā dūre santike vā sāsavā upādāniyā, ayaṃ vuccati saññupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of perception at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci saṅkhārā … pe … sāsavā upādāniyā, ayaṃ vuccati saṅkhārupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of choices at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ … pe … yaṃ dūre santike vā sāsavaṃ upādāniyaṃ, ayaṃ vuccati viññāṇupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, which is accompanied by defilements and is prone to being grasped: this is called the aggregate of consciousness connected with grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, pañcupādānakkhandhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the five grasping aggregates.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
