<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.151-151. Etaṃmamasutta  - 151. This Is Mine </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.151. 151. Etaṃmamasutta  - 151. This Is Mine </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Diṭṭhivagga  - 15. Views </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kismiṃ nu kho, bhikkhave, sati, kiṃ upādāya, kiṃ abhinivissa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on what, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">does someone regard things like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“rūpe kho, bhikkhave, sati, rūpaṃ upādāya, rūpaṃ abhinivissa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe sati, viññāṇaṃ upādāya, viññāṇaṃ abhinivissa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">someone regards it like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante” … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, api nu taṃ anupādāya etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attāti samanupasseyyāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would you regard it like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante” … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, api nu taṃ anupādāya etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attāti samanupasseyyāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would you regard it like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ passaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Seeing this … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
