<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.095-95. Pheṇapiṇḍūpamasutta  - 95. A Lump of Foam </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.095. 95. Pheṇapiṇḍūpamasutta  - 95. A Lump of Foam </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Pupphavagga  - 10. Flowers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā ayujjhāyaṃ viharati gaṅgāya nadiyā tīre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Ayojjhā on the bank of the Ganges river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṃ gaṅgā nadī mahantaṃ pheṇapiṇḍaṃ āvaheyya. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso passeyya nijjhāyeyya yoniso upaparikkheyya. Tassa taṃ passato nijjhāyato yoniso upaparikkhato rittakaññeva khāyeyya, tucchakaññeva khāyeyya, asārakaññeva khāyeyya. Kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, pheṇapiṇḍe sāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose this Ganges river was carrying along a big lump of foam. And a person with good eyesight would see it and contemplate it, examining it carefully. And it would appear to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a lump of foam? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yaṃ kiñci rūpaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ … pe … yaṃ dūre santike vā taṃ bhikkhu passati nijjhāyati yoniso upaparikkhati. Tassa taṃ passato nijjhāyato yoniso upaparikkhato rittakaññeva khāyati, tucchakaññeva khāyati, asārakaññeva khāyati. Kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, rūpe sāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; near or far—examining it carefully. And it appears to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in form? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, saradasamaye thullaphusitake deve vassante udake udakapubbuḷaṃ uppajjati ceva nirujjhati ca. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso passeyya nijjhāyeyya yoniso upaparikkheyya. Tassa taṃ passato nijjhāyato yoniso upaparikkhato rittakaññeva khāyeyya, tucchakaññeva khāyeyya, asārakaññeva khāyeyya. Kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, udakapubbuḷe sāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose it was the time of autumn, when the rain was falling heavily, and a bubble on the water forms and pops right away. And a person with good eyesight would see it and contemplate it, examining it carefully. And it would appear to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a water bubble? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yā kāci vedanā atītānāgatapaccuppannā … pe … yā dūre santike vā taṃ bhikkhu passati nijjhāyati yoniso upaparikkhati. Tassa taṃ passato nijjhāyato yoniso upaparikkhato rittakaññeva khāyati, tucchakaññeva khāyati, asārakaññeva khāyati. Kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, vedanāya sāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of feeling at all … examining it carefully. And it appears to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gimhānaṃ pacchime māse ṭhite majjhanhike kāle marīcikā phandati. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso passeyya nijjhāyeyya yoniso upaparikkheyya. Tassa taṃ passato nijjhāyato yoniso upaparikkhato rittakaññeva khāyeyya, tucchakaññeva khāyeyya … pe … kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, marīcikāya sāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose that in the last month of summer, at noon, a shimmering mirage appears. And a person with good eyesight would see it and contemplate it, examining it carefully. And it would appear to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a mirage? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yā kāci saññā … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of perception at all … examining it carefully. And it appears to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in perception? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso sāratthiko sāragavesī sārapariyesanaṃ caramāno tiṇhaṃ kuṭhāriṃ ādāya vanaṃ paviseyya. So tattha passeyya mahantaṃ kadalikkhandhaṃ ujuṃ navaṃ akukkukajātaṃ. Tamenaṃ mūle chindeyya; mūle chetvā agge chindeyya, agge chetvā pattavaṭṭiṃ vinibbhujeyya. So tassa pattavaṭṭiṃ vinibbhujanto pheggumpi nādhigaccheyya, kuto sāraṃ. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso passeyya nijjhāyeyya yoniso upaparikkheyya. Tassa taṃ passato nijjhāyato yoniso upaparikkhato rittakaññeva khāyeyya, tucchakaññeva khāyeyya, asārakaññeva khāyeyya. Kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, kadalikkhandhe sāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. Wandering in search of heartwood, they’d take a sharp axe and enter a forest. There they’d see a big banana tree, straight and young and grown free of defects. They’d cut it down at the base, cut off the top, and unroll the coiled sheaths. But they wouldn’t even find sapwood, much less heartwood. And a person with good eyesight would see it and contemplate it, examining it carefully. And it would appear to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a banana tree? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci saṅkhārā atītānāgatapaccuppannā … pe … ye dūre santike vā taṃ bhikkhu passati nijjhāyati yoniso upaparikkhati. Tassa taṃ passato nijjhāyato yoniso upaparikkhato rittakaññeva khāyati, tucchakaññeva khāyati, asārakaññeva khāyati. Kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, saṅkhāresu sāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of choices at all … examining them carefully. And they appear to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in choices? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, māyākāro vā māyākārantevāsī vā catumahāpathe māyaṃ vidaṃseyya. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso passeyya nijjhāyeyya yoniso upaparikkheyya. Tassa taṃ passato nijjhāyato yoniso upaparikkhato rittakaññeva khāyeyya, tucchakaññeva khāyeyya, asārakaññeva khāyeyya. Kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, māyāya sāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a magician or their apprentice was to perform a magic trick at the crossroads. And a person with good eyesight would see it and contemplate it, examining it carefully. And it would appear to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a magic trick? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ … pe … yaṃ dūre santike vā, taṃ bhikkhu passati nijjhāyati yoniso upaparikkhati. Tassa taṃ passato nijjhāyato yoniso upaparikkhato rittakaññeva khāyati, tucchakaññeva khāyati, asārakaññeva khāyati. Kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, viññāṇe sāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; near or far—examining it carefully. And it appears to them as completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in consciousness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpasmimpi nibbindati, vedanāyapi … saññāyapi … saṅkhāresupi … viññāṇasmimpi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati. Vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānāti”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pheṇapiṇḍūpamaṃ rūpaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Form is like a lump of foam; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā bubbuḷūpamā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling is like a bubble; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Marīcikūpamā saññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception seems like a mirage; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā kadalūpamā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices like a banana tree; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māyūpamañca viññāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness like a magic trick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">desitādiccabandhunā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so taught the Kinsman of the Sun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā nijjhāyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">However you contemplate them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yoniso upaparikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">examining them carefully, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rittakaṃ tucchakaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re void and hollow </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo naṃ passati yoniso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when you look at them closely. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imañca kāyaṃ ārabbha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Concerning this body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhūripaññena desitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he of vast wisdom has taught </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahānaṃ tiṇṇaṃ dhammānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that when three things are given up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ passatha chaḍḍitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll see this form discarded. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyu usmā ca viññāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Vitality, warmth, and consciousness: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadā kāyaṃ jahantimaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">when they leave the body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaviddho tadā seti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">it lies there tossed aside, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parabhattaṃ acetanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">food for others, mindless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etādisāyaṃ santāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is this process, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māyāyaṃ bālalāpinī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">this illusion, cooed over by fools. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vadhako esa akkhāto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s said to be a killer, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāro ettha na vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for no substance is found here. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ khandhe avekkheyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An energetic mendicant </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu āraddhavīriyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">should examine the aggregates like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Divā vā yadi vā rattiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with situational awareness and mindfulness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sampajāno paṭissato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jaheyya sabbasaṃyogaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should give up all fetters, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kareyya saraṇattano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and make a refuge for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Careyyādittasīsova, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should live as though their head was on fire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">patthayaṃ accutaṃ padan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">aspiring to the imperishable state.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
