<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.126-126. Samudayadhammasutta  - 126. Liable To Originate </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.126. 126. Samudayadhammasutta  - 126. Liable To Originate </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Avijjāvagga  - 13. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘avijjā, avijjā’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘ignorance’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, bhante, avijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is ignorance? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā ca avijjāgato hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is an ignorant person defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, assutavā puthujjano samudayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ ‘samudayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, it’s when an uneducated ordinary person doesn’t truly understand form, which is liable to originate, as form which is liable to originate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ ‘vayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand form, which is liable to vanish, as form which is liable to vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayavayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ ‘samudayavayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand form, which is liable to originate and vanish, as form which is liable to originate and vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ vedanaṃ ‘samudayadhammā vedanā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayadhammaṃ vedanaṃ ‘vayadhammā vedanā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayavayadhammaṃ vedanaṃ ‘samudayavayadhammā vedanā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ saññaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayadhamme saṅkhāre ‘samudayadhammā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayadhamme saṅkhāre ‘vayadhammā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayavayadhamme saṅkhāre ‘samudayavayadhammā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘samudayadhammaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, which is liable to originate, as consciousness which is liable to originate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘vayadhammaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand consciousness, which is liable to vanish, as consciousness which is liable to vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayavayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘samudayavayadhammaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand consciousness, which is liable to originate and vanish, as consciousness which is liable to originate and vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, avijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā ca avijjāgato hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how an ignorant person is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the mendicant said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘vijjā, vijjā’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘knowledge’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, bhante, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a knowledgeable person defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, sutavā ariyasāvako samudayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ ‘samudayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, it’s when an educated noble disciple truly understands form, which is liable to originate, as form which is liable to originate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ ‘vayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand form, which is liable to vanish, as form which is liable to vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayavayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ ‘samudayavayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand form, which is liable to originate and vanish, as form which is liable to originate and vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ vedanaṃ ‘samudayadhammā vedanā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayadhammaṃ vedanaṃ ‘vayadhammā vedanā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayavayadhammaṃ vedanaṃ ‘samudayavayadhammā vedanā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayadhamme saṅkhāre ‘samudayadhammā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayadhamme saṅkhāre ‘vayadhammā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayavayadhamme saṅkhāre ‘samudayavayadhammā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘samudayadhammaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, which is liable to originate, as consciousness which is liable to originate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘vayadhammaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand consciousness, which is liable to vanish, as consciousness which is liable to vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayavayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘samudayavayadhammaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand consciousness, which is liable to originate and vanish, as consciousness which is liable to originate and vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how a knowledgeable person is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
