<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.103-103. Antasutta  - 103. Sides </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.103. 103. Antasutta  - 103. Sides </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Antavagga  - 11. Sides </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, antā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkāyanto, sakkāyasamudayanto, sakkāyanirodhanto, sakkāyanirodhagāminippaṭipadanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The side of identity, the side of the origin of identity, the side of the cessation of identity, and the side of the practice that leads to the cessation of identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the side of identity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcupādānakkhandhātissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It should be said: the five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the side of identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayanto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the side of the origin of identity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ taṇhā ponobhavikā nandirāgasahagatā tatratatrābhinandinī, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure in various different realms. That is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the side of the origin of identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhanto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the side of the cessation of identity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodho cāgo paṭinissaggo mutti anālayo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not adhering to it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the side of the cessation of identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminippaṭipadanto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the side of the practice that leads to the cessation of identity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminippaṭipadanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the side of the practice that leads to the cessation of identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro antā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four sides.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
