<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.076-76. Arahantasutta  - 76. The Perfected Ones </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.076. 76. Arahantasutta  - 76. The Perfected Ones </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Khajjanīyavagga  - 8. Itchy </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpaṃ, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, form is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s impermanent is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s suffering is not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s impermanent is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s suffering is not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpasmimpi nibbindati, vedanāyapi … saññāyapi … saṅkhāresupi … viññāṇasmimpi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati. Vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, bhikkhave, sattāvāsā, yāvatā bhavaggaṃ, ete aggā, ete seṭṭhā lokasmiṃ yadidaṃ arahanto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As far as there are abodes of sentient beings, even up until the pinnacle of existence, the perfected ones are the foremost and the best.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sukhino vata arahanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Oh! How happy are the perfected ones! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhā tesaṃ na vijjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is not found in them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asmimāno samucchinno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the conceit ‘I am’ is cut off, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mohajālaṃ padālitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the net of delusion is shattered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anejaṃ te anuppattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve attained imperturbability, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittaṃ tesaṃ anāvilaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their minds are unclouded, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Loke anupalittā te, </span></p>
<p class="p3">nothing in the world clings to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmabhūtā anāsavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve become holy, undefiled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcakkhandhe pariññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Completely understanding the five aggregates, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satta saddhammagocarā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their domain is the seven good qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasaṃsiyā sappurisā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those good people are praiseworthy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puttā buddhassa orasā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddha’s rightful children. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattaratanasampannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Endowed with the seven gems, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīsu sikkhāsu sikkhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and trained in the three trainings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuvicaranti mahāvīrā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the great heroes live on, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahīnabhayabheravā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with fear and dread given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasahaṅgehi sampannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Endowed with ten factors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahānāgā samāhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those giants have immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete kho seṭṭhā lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the best in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhā tesaṃ na vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving is not found in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asekhañāṇamuppannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The master’s knowledge has arisen: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antimoyaṃ samussayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This bag of bones is my last.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sāro brahmacariyassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are independent of others </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ aparapaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the core of the spiritual path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vidhāsu na vikampanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Unwavering in the face of discrimination, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vippamuttā punabbhavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re freed from future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dantabhūmimanuppattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve reached the level of the tamed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te loke vijitāvino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the world, they’re the winners. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaṃ tiriyaṃ apācīnaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Above, below, and all around, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nandī tesaṃ na vijjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">relishing is not found in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nadanti te sīhanādaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They roar their lion’s roar: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhā loke anuttarā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The awakened are supreme in the world!’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
