<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.123-123. Sutavantasutta  - 123. Educated </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.123. 123. Sutavantasutta  - 123. Educated </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Dhammakathikavagga  - 12. A Dhamma speaker </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca sāriputto āyasmā ca mahākoṭṭhiko bārāṇasiyaṃ viharanti isipatane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita were staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahākoṭṭhiko sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā … pe … etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita came out of retreat, went to Venerable Sāriputta, bowed, sat down to one side, and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sutavatāvuso sāriputta, bhikkhunā katame dhammā yoniso manasi kātabbā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, what things should an educated mendicant properly attend to?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sutavatāvuso koṭṭhika, bhikkhunā pañcupādānakkhandhā aniccato … pe … anattato yoniso manasi kātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“An educated mendicant should properly attend to these five grasping aggregates as impermanent … as not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—rūpupādānakkhandho … pe … viññāṇupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutavatāvuso koṭṭhika, bhikkhunā ime pañcupādānakkhandhā aniccato … pe … anattato yoniso manasi kātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An educated mendicant should properly attend to these five grasping aggregates as impermanent … as not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, āvuso, vijjati—yaṃ sutavā bhikkhu ime pañcupādānakkhandhe aniccato … pe … anattato yoniso manasi karonto sotāpattiphalaṃ sacchikareyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s possible that an educated mendicant who regards the five grasping aggregates in this way will realize the fruit of stream-entry.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sotāpannena panāvuso sāriputta, bhikkhunā katame dhammā yoniso manasi kātabbā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Reverend Sāriputta, what things should a mendicant stream-enterer properly attend to?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sotāpannenapi kho āvuso koṭṭhika, bhikkhunā ime pañcupādānakkhandhā aniccato … pe … anattato yoniso manasi kātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A mendicant stream-enterer should properly attend to these five grasping aggregates as impermanent … as not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, āvuso, vijjati—yaṃ sotāpanno bhikkhu ime pañcupādānakkhandhe aniccato … pe … anattato yoniso manasi karonto sakadāgāmiphalaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s possible that a mendicant stream-enterer who regards the five grasping aggregates in this way will realize the fruit of once-return.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgāmiphalaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s possible that a mendicant once-returner who regards the five grasping aggregates in this way will realize the fruit of non-return.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">arahattaphalaṃ sacchikareyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s possible that a mendicant non-returner who regards the five grasping aggregates in this way will realize the fruit of perfection.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Arahatā panāvuso sāriputta, katame dhammā yoniso manasi kātabbā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Reverend Sāriputta, what things should a perfected one properly attend to?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Arahatāpi khvāvuso koṭṭhika, ime pañcupādānakkhandhā aniccato dukkhato rogato gaṇḍato sallato aghato ābādhato parato palokato suññato anattato yoniso manasi kātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Koṭṭhita, a perfected one should properly attend to the five grasping aggregates as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as an abscess, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi, khvāvuso, arahato uttari karaṇīyaṃ, katassa vā paticayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A perfected one has nothing more to do, and nothing that needs improvement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ca kho ime dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārāya ceva saṃvattanti satisampajaññāya cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Still, these things, when developed and cultivated, lead to blissful meditation in the present life, and also to mindfulness and situational awareness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
