<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.074-74. Samudayasutta  - 74. Origin </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.074. 74. Samudayasutta  - 74. Origin </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Khajjanīyavagga  - 8. Itchy </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Assutavā, bhikkhave, puthujjano rūpassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, an uneducated ordinary person doesn’t truly understand the origin, the ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutavā ca kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako rūpassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An educated noble disciple does truly understand the origin, the ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
