<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.029-29. Abhinandanasutta  - 29. Taking Pleasure </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.029. 29. Abhinandanasutta  - 29. Taking Pleasure </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Bhāravagga  - 3. The Burden </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ abhinandati, dukkhaṃ so abhinandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if you take pleasure in form, you take pleasure in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dukkhaṃ abhinandati, aparimutto so dukkhasmāti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you take pleasure in suffering, I say you’re not exempt from suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo vedanaṃ abhinandati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you take pleasure in feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo saññaṃ abhinandati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo saṅkhāre abhinandati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo viññāṇaṃ abhinandati, dukkhaṃ so abhinandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, you take pleasure in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dukkhaṃ abhinandati, aparimutto so dukkhasmāti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you take pleasure in suffering, I say you’re not exempt from suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ nābhinandati, dukkhaṃ so nābhinandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t take pleasure in form, you don’t take pleasure in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dukkhaṃ nābhinandati, parimutto so dukkhasmāti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t take pleasure in suffering, I say you’re exempt from suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo vedanaṃ nābhinandati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t take pleasure in feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo saññaṃ nābhinandati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo saṅkhāre nābhinandati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo viññāṇaṃ nābhinandati, dukkhaṃ so nābhinandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, you don’t take pleasure in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dukkhaṃ nābhinandati, parimutto so dukkhasmāti vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t take pleasure in suffering, I say you’re exempt from suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
