<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.105-105. Sakkāyasutta  - 105. Identity </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.105. 105. Sakkāyasutta  - 105. Identity </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Antavagga  - 11. Sides </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkāyañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi sakkāyasamudayañca sakkāyanirodhañca sakkāyanirodhagāminiñca paṭipadaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you identity, the origin of identity, the cessation of identity, and the practice that leads to the cessation of identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is identity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcupādānakkhandhātissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It should be said: the five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the origin of identity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ taṇhā ponobhavikā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, looking for enjoyment anywhere it can. That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the origin of identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the cessation of identity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo tassāyeva taṇhāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the cessation of identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the practice that leads to the cessation of identity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminī paṭipadā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of identity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
