<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.078-78. Sīhasutta  - 78. The Lion </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.078. 78. Sīhasutta  - 78. The Lion </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Khajjanīyavagga  - 8. Itchy </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sīho, bhikkhave, migarājā sāyanhasamayaṃ āsayā nikkhamati; āsayā nikkhamitvā vijambhati; vijambhitvā samantā catuddisā anuviloketi; samantā catuddisā anuviloketvā tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ nadati; tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ naditvā gocarāya pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, towards evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his den, yawns, looks all around the four directions, and roars his lion’s roar three times. Then he sets out on the hunt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, tiracchānagatā pāṇā sīhassa migarañño nadato saddaṃ suṇanti; yebhuyyena bhayaṃ saṃvegaṃ santāsaṃ āpajjanti; bilaṃ bilāsayā pavisanti; dakaṃ dakāsayā pavisanti; vanaṃ vanāsayā pavisanti; ākāsaṃ pakkhino bhajanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the animals who hear the roar of the lion, king of beasts, are typically filled with fear, awe, and terror. They return to their lairs, be they in a hole, the water, or a wood; and the birds take to the air. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, bhikkhave, rañño nāgā gāmanigamarājadhānīsu, daḷhehi varattehi baddhā, tepi tāni bandhanāni sañchinditvā sampadāletvā bhītā muttakarīsaṃ cajamānā, yena vā tena vā palāyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even the royal elephants, bound with strong harness in the villages, towns, and capital cities, break apart their bonds, and urinate and defecate in terror as they flee here and there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mahiddhiko kho, bhikkhave, sīho migarājā tiracchānagatānaṃ pāṇānaṃ, evaṃ mahesakkho, evaṃ mahānubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how powerful is the lion, king of beasts, among animals, how illustrious and mighty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yadā tathāgato loke uppajjati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā. So dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when a Realized One arises in the world—perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed—he teaches the Dhamma: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iti rūpaṃ, iti rūpassa samudayo, iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti viññāṇaṃ, iti viññāṇassa samudayo, iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, bhikkhave, devā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā uccesu vimānesu ciraṭṭhitikā tepi tathāgatassa dhammadesanaṃ sutvā yebhuyyena bhayaṃ saṃvegaṃ santāsaṃ āpajjanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, there are gods who are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy, living for ages in their divine palaces. When they hear this teaching by the Realized One, they’re typically filled with fear, awe, and terror. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aniccāva kira, bho, mayaṃ samānā niccamhāti amaññimha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Oh no! It turns out we’re impermanent, though we thought we were permanent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addhuvāva kira, bho, mayaṃ samānā dhuvamhāti amaññimha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It turns out we don’t last, though we thought we were everlasting! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asassatāva kira, bho, mayaṃ samānā sassatamhāti amaññimha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It turns out we’re short-lived, though we thought we were eternal! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayampi kira, bho, aniccā addhuvā asassatā sakkāyapariyāpannā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It turns out that we’re impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, and included within identity.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mahiddhiko kho, bhikkhave, tathāgato sadevakassa lokassa, evaṃ mahesakkho, evaṃ mahānubhāvo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how powerful is the Realized One in the world with its gods, how illustrious and mighty.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yadā buddho abhiññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha, the teacher without a peer </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammacakkaṃ pavattayi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in all the world with its gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadevakassa lokassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">rolls forth the Wheel of Dhamma </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthā appaṭipuggalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">from his own insight: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkāyañca nirodhañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">identity, its cessation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkāyassa ca sambhavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the origin of identity, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyañcaṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the noble eightfold path </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhūpasamagāminaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that leads to the stilling of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi dīghāyukā devā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then the long-lived gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṇṇavanto yasassino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">so beautiful and glorious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhītā santāsamāpāduṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">are afraid and full of terror, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīhassevitare migā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the other beasts when they hear a lion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avītivattā sakkāyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We haven’t transcended identity! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aniccā kira bho mayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It turns out we’re impermanent!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvā arahato vākyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they say when they hear the word </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vippamuttassa tādino”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of the perfected one, free and poised.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
