<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.146-146. Nibbidābahulasutta  - 146. Full of Disillusionment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.146. 146. Nibbidābahulasutta  - 146. Full of Disillusionment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Kukkuḷavagga  - 14. Burning Chaff </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddhāpabbajitassa, bhikkhave, kulaputtassa ayamanudhammo hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a gentleman has gone forth out of faith, this is what’s in line with the teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ rūpe nibbidābahulo vihareyya. Vedanāya … pe … saññāya … saṅkhāresu … viññāṇe nibbidābahulo vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should live full of disillusionment for form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo rūpe nibbidābahulo viharanto, vedanāya … saññāya … saṅkhāresu … viññāṇe nibbidābahulo viharanto rūpaṃ parijānāti, vedanaṃ … saññaṃ … saṅkhāre … viññāṇaṃ parijānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Living in this way, they completely understand form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so rūpaṃ parijānaṃ vedanaṃ parijānaṃ saññaṃ parijānaṃ saṅkhāre parijānaṃ viññāṇaṃ parijānaṃ parimuccati rūpamhā, parimuccati vedanāya, parimuccati saññāya, parimuccati saṅkhārehi, parimuccati viññāṇamhā, parimuccati jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi; ‘parimuccati dukkhasmā’ti vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Completely understanding form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness, they’re freed from these things. They’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They’re freed from suffering, I say.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
