<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.056-56. Upādānaparipavattasutta  - 56. Perspectives </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.056. 56. Upādānaparipavattasutta  - 56. Perspectives </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Upayavagga  - 6. Involvement </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, upādānakkhandhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañcāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ime pañcupādānakkhandhe catuparivaṭṭaṃ yathābhūtaṃ nābbhaññāsiṃ, neva tāvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddhoti paccaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I didn’t truly understand these five grasping aggregates from four perspectives, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca khvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ime pañcupādānakkhandhe catuparivaṭṭaṃ yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, athāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when I did truly understand these five grasping aggregates from four perspectives, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sadevamanussāya anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddhoti paccaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca catuparivaṭṭaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are there four perspectives? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, rūpasamudayaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, rūpanirodhaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, rūpanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I directly knew form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I directly knew feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, viññāṇasamudayaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, viññāṇanirodhaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, viññāṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is form? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāro ca mahābhūtā catunnañca mahābhūtānaṃ upādāya rūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The four primary elements, and form derived from the four primary elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhārasamudayā rūpasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form originates from food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āhāranirodhā rūpanirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When food ceases, form ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo rūpanirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of form is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ rūpaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpanirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya rūpassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipannā, te suppaṭipannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation—and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form: they are practicing well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suppaṭipannā, te imasmiṃ dhammavinaye gādhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who practice well have a firm footing in this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ rūpaṃ abhiññāya … pe … evaṃ rūpanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya, rūpassa nibbidā virāgā nirodhā anupādā vimuttā te suvimuttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation—and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suvimuttā te kevalino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who are well freed are consummate ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kevalino vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to be found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, vedanākāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of feeling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhusamphassajā vedanā, sotasamphassajā vedanā, ghānasamphassajā vedanā, jivhāsamphassajā vedanā, kāyasamphassajā vedanā, manosamphassajā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling born of contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling originates from contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassanirodhā vedanānirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact ceases, feeling ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply this noble eightfold path … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ vedanaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ vedanāsamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ vedanānirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ vedanānirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya vedanāya nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipannā, te suppaṭipannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suppaṭipannā, te imasmiṃ dhammavinaye gādhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ vedanaṃ abhiññāya … pe … evaṃ vedanānirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, saññā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is perception? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, saññākāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of perception: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpasaññā, saddasaññā, gandhasaññā, rasasaññā, phoṭṭhabbasaññā, dhammasaññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">perceptions of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, saññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassasamudayā saññāsamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception originates from contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassanirodhā saññānirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact ceases, perception ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo saññānirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of perceptions is simply this noble eightfold path … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are choices? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, cetanākāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of intention: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpasañcetanā, saddasañcetanā, gandhasañcetanā, rasasañcetanā, phoṭṭhabbasañcetanā, dhammasañcetanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">intention regarding sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassasamudayā saṅkhārasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices originate from contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassanirodhā saṅkhāranirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact ceases, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo saṅkhāranirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is simply this noble eightfold path … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ saṅkhāre abhiññāya, evaṃ saṅkhārasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ saṅkhāranirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya saṅkhārānaṃ nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipannā, te suppaṭipannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suppaṭipannā, te imasmiṃ dhammavinaye gādhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ saṅkhāre abhiññāya, evaṃ saṅkhārasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ saṅkhāranirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya saṅkhārānaṃ nibbidā virāgā nirodhā anupādā vimuttā, te suvimuttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suvimuttā, te kevalino. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kevalino vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is consciousness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, viññāṇakāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of consciousness: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuviññāṇaṃ, sotaviññāṇaṃ, ghānaviññāṇaṃ, jivhāviññāṇaṃ, kāyaviññāṇaṃ, manoviññāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpasamudayā viññāṇasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness originates from name and form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpanirodhā viññāṇanirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form cease, consciousness ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo viññāṇanirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of consciousness is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ viññāṇaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇanirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya viññāṇassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipannā, te suppaṭipannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation—and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness: they are practicing well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suppaṭipannā, te imasmiṃ dhammavinaye gādhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who practice well have a firm footing in this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ viññāṇaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇanirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya viññāṇassa nibbidā virāgā nirodhā anupādā vimuttā, te suvimuttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation—and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suvimuttā, te kevalino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who are well freed are consummate ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kevalino vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to be found.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
