<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.057-57. Sattaṭṭhānasutta  - 57. Seven Cases </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.057. 57. Sattaṭṭhānasutta  - 57. Seven Cases </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Upayavagga  - 6. Involvement </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattaṭṭhānakusalo, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tividhūpaparikkhī imasmiṃ dhammavinaye kevalī vusitavā uttamapurisoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in this teaching and training a mendicant who is skilled in seven cases and who examines in three ways is called consummate, accomplished, a supreme person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sattaṭṭhānakusalo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant skilled in seven cases? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu rūpaṃ pajānāti, rūpasamudayaṃ pajānāti, rūpanirodhaṃ pajānāti, rūpanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant understands form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpassa assādaṃ pajānāti, rūpassa ādīnavaṃ pajānāti, rūpassa nissaraṇaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand form’s gratification, drawback, and escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ pajānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ pajānāti, viññāṇasamudayaṃ pajānāti, viññāṇanirodhaṃ pajānāti, viññāṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇassa assādaṃ pajānāti, viññāṇassa ādīnavaṃ pajānāti, viññāṇassa nissaraṇaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand consciousness’s gratification, drawback, and escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is form? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāro ca mahābhūtā, catunnañca mahābhūtānaṃ upādāya rūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The four primary elements, and form derived from the four primary elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhārasamudayā rūpasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form originates from food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āhāranirodhā rūpanirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When food ceases, form ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo rūpanirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of form is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ rūpaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ rūpassa assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ rūpaṃ aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ rūpassa ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo rūpasmiṃ chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this is its escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ rūpassa nissaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ rūpaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpanirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ rūpassa assādaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpassa ādīnavaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpassa nissaraṇaṃ abhiññāya rūpassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipannā, te suppaṭipannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">its gratification, drawback, and escape—and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form: they are practicing well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suppaṭipannā, te imasmiṃ dhammavinaye gādhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who practice well have a firm footing in this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ rūpaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpanirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ rūpassa assādaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpassa ādīnavaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ rūpassa nissaraṇaṃ abhiññāya rūpassa nibbidā virāgā nirodhā anupādā vimuttā, te suvimuttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">its gratification, drawback, and escape—and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suvimuttā, te kevalino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who are well freed are consummate ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kevalino vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to be found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, vedanākāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of feeling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhusamphassajā vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling born of eye contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manosamphassajā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling born of mind contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling originates from contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassanirodhā vedanānirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact ceases, feeling ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ vedanaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vedanāya assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā vedanā aniccā dukkhā vipariṇāmadhammā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That feeling is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vedanāya ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo vedanāya chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for feeling: this is its escape. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vedanāya nissaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi, keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ vedanaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ vedanāsamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ vedanānirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ vedanānirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ vedanāya assādaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ vedanāya ādīnavaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ vedanāya nissaraṇaṃ abhiññāya vedanāya nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipannā, te suppaṭipannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suppaṭipannā, te imasmiṃ dhammavinaye gādhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ vedanaṃ abhiññāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, saññā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is perception? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, saññākāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of perception: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpasaññā, saddasaññā, gandhasaññā, rasasaññā, phoṭṭhabbasaññā, dhammasaññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">perceptions of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, saññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassasamudayā saññāsamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception originates from contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassanirodhā saññānirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact ceases, perception ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo saññānirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of perceptions is simply this noble eightfold path … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are choices? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, cetanākāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of intention: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpasañcetanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">intention regarding sights … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammasañcetanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">intention regarding thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassasamudayā saṅkhārasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices originate from contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassanirodhā saṅkhāranirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact ceases, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo saṅkhāranirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is simply this noble eightfold path … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ saṅkhāre paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ saṅkhārānaṃ assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye saṅkhārā aniccā dukkhā vipariṇāmadhammā—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ saṅkhārānaṃ ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo saṅkhāresu chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ saṅkhārānaṃ nissaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ saṅkhāre abhiññāya, evaṃ saṅkhārasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ saṅkhāranirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya … pe … saṅkhārānaṃ nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipannā te suppaṭipannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suppaṭipannā, te imasmiṃ dhammavinaye gādhanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is consciousness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, viññāṇakāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of consciousness: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuviññāṇaṃ, sotaviññāṇaṃ, ghānaviññāṇaṃ, jivhāviññāṇaṃ, kāyaviññāṇaṃ, manoviññāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpasamudayā viññāṇasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness originates from name and form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpanirodhā viññāṇanirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form cease, consciousness ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo viññāṇanirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of consciousness is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ viññāṇaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasure and happiness that arise from consciousness: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ viññāṇassa assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ viññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ viññāṇassa ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo viññāṇasmiṃ chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for consciousness: this is its escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ viññāṇassa nissaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ viññāṇaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇanirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ viññāṇassa assādaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇassa ādīnavaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇassa nissaraṇaṃ abhiññāya viññāṇassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipannā, te suppaṭipannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">its gratification, drawback, and escape—and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness: they are practicing well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suppaṭipannā, te imasmiṃ dhammavinaye gādhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who practice well have a firm footing in this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ viññāṇaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇasamudayaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇanirodhaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhiññāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ viññāṇassa assādaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇassa ādīnavaṃ abhiññāya, evaṃ viññāṇassa nissaraṇaṃ abhiññāya viññāṇassa nibbidā virāgā nirodhā anupādā vimuttā, te suvimuttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">its gratification, drawback, and escape—and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye suvimuttā, te kevalino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who are well freed are consummate ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kevalino vaṭṭaṃ tesaṃ natthi paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to be found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sattaṭṭhānakusalo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is skilled in seven cases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tividhūpaparikkhī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant examine in three ways? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhātuso upaparikkhati, āyatanaso upaparikkhati, paṭiccasamuppādaso upaparikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant examines the elements, sense fields, and dependent origination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tividhūpaparikkhī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant examines in three ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattaṭṭhānakusalo, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tividhūpaparikkhī, imasmiṃ dhammavinaye kevalī vusitavā ‘uttamapuriso’ti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this teaching and training, a mendicant who is skilled in seven cases and who examines in three ways is called consummate, accomplished, a supreme person.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
