<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>23.04-4. Pariññeyyasutta  - 4. Should Be Completely Understood </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">23.04. 4. Pariññeyyasutta  - 4. Should Be Completely Understood </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamamāravagga  - 1. About Māra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā rādho yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ rādhaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Rādha went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pariññeyye ca, rādha, dhamme desessāmi pariññañca pariññātāviṃ puggalañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rādha, I will teach you the things that should be completely understood, complete understanding, and the person who has completely understood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā rādho bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Rādha replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katame ca, rādha, pariññeyyā dhammā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what things should be completely understood? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ kho, rādha, pariññeyyo dhammo, vedanā pariññeyyo dhammo, saññā pariññeyyo dhammo, saṅkhārā pariññeyyo dhammo, viññāṇaṃ pariññeyyo dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, rādha, pariññeyyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that should be completely understood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, rādha, pariññā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is complete understanding? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, rādha, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, rādha, pariññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called complete understanding. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, rādha, pariññātāvī puggalo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the person who has completely understood? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Arahā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It should be said: a perfected one, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ āyasmā evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the venerable of such and such name and clan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, rādha, pariññātāvī puggalo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the person who has completely understood.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
