<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>23.23-33-23–33. Mārādisuttaekādasaka  - 23–33. Eleven Discourses on Māra, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">23.23-33. 23–33. Mārādisuttaekādasaka  - 23–33. Eleven Discourses on Māra, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Āyācanavagga  - 3. Appeals </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā rādho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, Venerable Rādha said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṃ desetu, yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, māro; tatra te chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rādha, you should give up any desire, any greed, any desire and greed for whatever is Māra. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, rādha, māro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is Māra? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ kho, rādha, māro; tatra te chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form is Māra. You should give up any desire, any greed, any desire and greed for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā māro; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā māro; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā māro; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ māro; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is Māra. You should give up any desire, any greed, any desire and greed for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo kho, rādha, māro; tatra te chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should give up any desire, any greed, any desire and greed for whatever is Māra.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, māradhammo; tatra te chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo … pe …. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You should give up any desire, any greed, any desire and greed for whatever is of Māra-like nature …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, rādha, aniccaṃ … pe …. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… impermanent …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, aniccadhammo … pe …. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… naturally impermanent …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, rādha, dukkhaṃ … pe …. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… suffering …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, dukkhadhammo … pe …. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… things that entail suffering …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, anattā … pe …. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… not-self …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, anattadhammo … pe …. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… naturally not-self …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, khayadhammo … pe …. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… liable to end …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, vayadhammo … pe …. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… liable to vanish …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, samudayadhammo; tatra te chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo … pe …. (11) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… liable to originate …”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
