<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>23.02-2. Sattasutta  - 2. Sentient Beings </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">23.02. 2. Sattasutta  - 2. Sentient Beings </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamamāravagga  - 1. About Māra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā rādho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, Venerable Rādha said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘satto, satto’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called a ‘sentient being’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, sattoti vuccatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a sentient being defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpe kho, rādha, yo chando yo rāgo yā nandī yā taṇhā, tatra satto, tatra visatto, tasmā sattoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rādha, when you cling, strongly cling, to desire, greed, relishing, and craving for form, then a being is spoken of. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you cling, strongly cling, to desire, greed, relishing, and craving for feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe yo chando yo rāgo yā nandī yā taṇhā, tatra satto, tatra visatto, tasmā sattoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, then a being is spoken of. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, rādha, kumārakā vā kumārikāyo vā paṃsvāgārakehi kīḷanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose some boys or girls were playing with sandcastles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca tesu paṃsvāgārakesu avigatarāgā honti avigatacchandā avigatapemā avigatapipāsā avigatapariḷāhā avigatataṇhā, tāva tāni paṃsvāgārakāni allīyanti keḷāyanti dhanāyanti mamāyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as they’re not rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for those sandcastles, they cherish them, fancy them, treasure them, and treat them as their own. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, rādha, kumārakā vā kumārikāyo vā tesu paṃsvāgārakesu vigatarāgā honti vigatacchandā vigatapemā vigatapipāsā vigatapariḷāhā vigatataṇhā, atha kho tāni paṃsvāgārakāni hatthehi ca pādehi ca vikiranti vidhamanti viddhaṃsenti vikīḷaniyaṃ karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they are rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for those sandcastles, they scatter, destroy, and demolish them with their hands and feet, making them unplayable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, rādha, tumhepi rūpaṃ vikiratha vidhamatha viddhaṃsetha vikīḷaniyaṃ karotha taṇhākkhayāya paṭipajjatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, you should scatter, destroy, and demolish form, making it unplayable. And you should practice for the ending of craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanaṃ vikiratha vidhamatha viddhaṃsetha vikīḷaniyaṃ karotha taṇhākkhayāya paṭipajjatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should scatter, destroy, and demolish feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre vikiratha vidhamatha viddhaṃsetha vikīḷaniyaṃ karotha taṇhākkhayāya paṭipajjatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇaṃ vikiratha vidhamatha viddhaṃsetha vikīḷaniyaṃ karotha taṇhākkhayāya paṭipajjatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, making it unplayable. And you should practice for the ending of craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhākkhayo hi, rādha, nibbānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the ending of craving is extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
