<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>24.45-45. Navātasutta  - 45. Winds </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">24.45. 45. Navātasutta  - 45. Winds </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyagamanavagga  - 3. The Third Round </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kismiṃ nu kho, bhikkhave, sati, kiṃ upādāya, kiṃ abhinivissa evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on what, does the view arise: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na vātā vāyanti, na najjo sandanti, na gabbhiniyo vijāyanti, na candimasūriyā udenti vā apenti vā esikaṭṭhāyiṭṭhitā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Winds don’t blow; rivers don’t flow; pregnant women don’t give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like a pillar’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpe kho, bhikkhave, sati, rūpaṃ upādāya, rūpaṃ abhinivissa evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the view arises: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vātā vāyanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Winds don’t blow; rivers don’t flow; pregnant women don’t give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like a pillar.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāya sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe sati, viññāṇaṃ upādāya, viññāṇaṃ abhinivissa evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na vātā vāyanti … pe … esikaṭṭhāyiṭṭhitā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Winds don’t blow; rivers don’t flow; pregnant women don’t give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like a pillar.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante” … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, api nu taṃ anupādāya evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would the view arise: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na vātā vāyanti … pe … esikaṭṭhāyiṭṭhitā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Winds don’t blow; rivers don’t flow; pregnant women don’t give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like a pillar’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iti kho, bhikkhave, yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And so, what’s impermanent is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ sati, tadupādāya, evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this exists, grasping at this, the view arises: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na vātā vāyanti, na najjo sandanti, na gabbhiniyo vijāyanti, na candimasūriyā udenti vā apenti vā esikaṭṭhāyiṭṭhitā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Winds don’t blow; rivers don’t flow; pregnant women don’t give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like a pillar.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante” … pe … vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api nu taṃ anupādāya evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na vātā vāyanti … pe … esikaṭṭhāyiṭṭhitā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iti kho, bhikkhave, yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And so, what’s impermanent is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ sati, tadupādāya evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this exists, grasping at this, the view arises: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na vātā vāyanti … pe … esikaṭṭhāyiṭṭhitā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Winds don’t blow; rivers don’t flow; pregnant women don’t give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like a pillar.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
