<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>25.10-10. Khandhasutta  - 10. The Aggregates </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">25.10. 10. Khandhasutta  - 10. The Aggregates </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cakkhuvagga  - 1. The Eye </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpaṃ, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ vipariṇāmi aññathābhāvi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, form is impermanent, perishing, and changing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā aniccā vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā aniccā vipariṇāmino aññathābhāvino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ vipariṇāmi aññathābhāvi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness are impermanent, perishing, and changing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, bhikkhave, ime dhamme evaṃ saddahati adhimuccati, ayaṃ vuccati saddhānusārī, okkanto sammattaniyāmaṃ, sappurisabhūmiṃ okkanto, vītivatto puthujjanabhūmiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who has faith and confidence in these principles is called a follower by faith. They’ve arrived at inevitability regarding the right path, they’ve arrived at the level of the good person, and they’ve transcended the level of the bad person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhabbo taṃ kammaṃ kātuṃ, yaṃ kammaṃ katvā nirayaṃ vā tiracchānayoniṃ vā pettivisayaṃ vā upapajjeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They can’t do any deed which would make them be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhabbo ca tāva kālaṃ kātuṃ yāva na sotāpattiphalaṃ sacchikaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They can’t die without realizing the fruit of stream-entry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kho, bhikkhave, ime dhammā evaṃ paññāya mattaso nijjhānaṃ khamanti, ayaṃ vuccati: ‘dhammānusārī, okkanto sammattaniyāmaṃ, sappurisabhūmiṃ okkanto, vītivatto puthujjanabhūmiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who accepts these principles after considering them with a degree of wisdom is called a follower of the teachings. They’ve arrived at inevitability regarding the right path, they’ve arrived at the level of the good person, and they’ve transcended the level of the bad person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhabbo taṃ kammaṃ kātuṃ, yaṃ kammaṃ katvā nirayaṃ vā tiracchānayoniṃ vā pettivisayaṃ vā upapajjeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They can’t do any deed which would make them be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhabbo ca tāva kālaṃ kātuṃ yāva na sotāpattiphalaṃ sacchikaroti’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They can’t die without realizing the fruit of stream-entry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, bhikkhave, ime dhamme evaṃ pajānāti evaṃ passati, ayaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who understands and sees these principles is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuvaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu rūpañca viññāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phasso ca vedanāya ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññā ca cetanā taṇhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhātu khandhena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Okkantasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on arrival are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
