<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>26.01-1. Cakkhusutta  - 1. The Eye </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">26.01. 1. Cakkhusutta  - 1. The Eye </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Uppādavagga  - 1. Arising </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, bhikkhave, cakkhussa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṃ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the eye is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sotassa uppādo ṭhiti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the ear, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo ghānassa uppādo ṭhiti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nose, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo jivhāya uppādo ṭhiti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tongue, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo kāyassa uppādo ṭhiti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo manassa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṃ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and mind is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca, bhikkhave, cakkhussa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṃ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation, settling, and ending of the eye is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sotassa nirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation, settling, and ending of the ear, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo ghānassa nirodho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nose, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo kāyassa nirodho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo manassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṃ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and mind is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
