<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>26.02-2. Rūpasutta  - 2. Sights </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">26.02. 2. Rūpasutta  - 2. Sights </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Uppādavagga  - 1. Arising </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṃ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of sights is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo saddānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of sounds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo gandhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo rasānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo phoṭṭhabbānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo dhammānaṃ uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṃ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and thoughts is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṃ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation, settling, and ending of sights, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo saddānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">sounds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo gandhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo rasānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo phoṭṭhabbānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo dhammānaṃ nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṃ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and thoughts is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
