<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>28.02-2. Avitakkasutta  - 2. Without Placing the Mind </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">28.02. 2. Avitakkasutta  - 2. Without Placing the Mind </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sāriputtavagga  - 1. With Sāriputta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā ānando … pe … āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Ānanda saw Venerable Sāriputta and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vippasannāni kho te, āvuso sāriputta, indriyāni; parisuddho mukhavaṇṇo pariyodāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamenāyasmā sāriputto ajja vihārena vihāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What meditation were you practicing today?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāhaṃ, āvuso, vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it didn’t occur to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpanno’ti vā ‘ahaṃ dutiyā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am entering the second absorption’ or ‘I have entered the second absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the second absorption’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā hi panāyasmato sāriputtassa dīgharattaṃ ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā susamūhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated ego, possessiveness, and the underlying tendency to conceit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āyasmato sāriputtassa na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it didn’t occur to you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘ahaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpanno’ti vā ‘ahaṃ dutiyā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am entering the second absorption’ or ‘I have entered the second absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the second absorption’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
