<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>28.03-3. Pītisutta  - 3. Rapture </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">28.03. 3. Pītisutta  - 3. Rapture </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sāriputtavagga  - 1. With Sāriputta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā ānando … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Ānanda saw Venerable Sāriputta and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vippasannāni kho te, āvuso sāriputta, indriyāni; parisuddho mukhavaṇṇo pariyodāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamenāyasmā sāriputto ajja vihārena vihāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What meditation were you practicing today?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāhaṃ, āvuso, pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca vihāsiṃ sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṃvedemi; yaṃ taṃ ariyā ācikkhanti ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, with the fading away of rapture, I entered and remained in the third absorption, where I meditated with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it didn’t occur to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpanno’ti vā ‘ahaṃ tatiyā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am entering the third absorption’ or ‘I have entered the third absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the third absorption’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā hi panāyasmato sāriputtassa dīgharattaṃ ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā susamūhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated ego, possessiveness, and the underlying tendency to conceit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āyasmato sāriputtassa na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it didn’t occur to you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘ahaṃ tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpanno’ti vā ‘ahaṃ tatiyā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am entering the third absorption’ or ‘I have entered the third absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the third absorption’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
