<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>29.21-50-21–50. Jalābujādidānūpakārasuttattiṃsaka  - 21–50. Thirty Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become Womb-Born, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">29.21-50. 21–50. Jalābujādidānūpakārasuttattiṃsaka  - 21–50. Thirty Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become Womb-Born, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nāgavagga  - 1. Dragons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā jalābujānaṃ nāgānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the womb-born dragons … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃsedajānaṃ nāgānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">moisture-born dragons … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">opapātikānaṃ nāgānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">spontaneously-born dragons?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena dvayakārī hoti, vācāya dvayakārī, manasā dvayakārī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, it’s when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sutaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they’ve heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘opapātikā nāgā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The spontaneously-born dragons are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāhaṃ kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā opapātikānaṃ nāgānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjeyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born dragons!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So annaṃ deti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give food … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pānaṃ deti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">drink … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padīpeyyaṃ deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a lamp. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā opapātikānaṃ nāgānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born dragons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā opapātikānaṃ nāgānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born dragons.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Iminā peyyālena dasa dasa suttantā kātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">(Each set of ten discourses of this series should be treated in the same way.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ catūsu yonīsu cattālīsaṃ veyyākaraṇā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purimehi pana dasahi suttantehi saha honti paṇṇāsasuttantāti.) </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāgavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suddhikaṃ paṇītataraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">caturo ca uposathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sutaṃ caturo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dānūpakārā ca tālīsaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṇṇāsa piṇḍato suttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāgamhi suppakāsitāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāgasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on dragons are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
