<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>29.02-2. Paṇītatarasutta  - 2. Better </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">29.02. 2. Paṇītatarasutta  - 2. Better </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nāgavagga  - 1. Dragons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catasso imā, bhikkhave, nāgayoniyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, dragons reproduce in these four ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā catasso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṇḍajā nāgā, jalābujā nāgā, saṃsedajā nāgā, opapātikā nāgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dragons are born from an egg, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, aṇḍajehi nāgehi jalābujā ca saṃsedajā ca opapātikā ca nāgā paṇītatarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of these, dragons born from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously are better than those born from an egg. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, aṇḍajehi ca jalābujehi ca nāgehi saṃsedajā ca opapātikā ca nāgā paṇītatarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dragons born from moisture or spontaneously are better than those born from an egg or from a womb. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, aṇḍajehi ca jalābujehi ca saṃsedajehi ca nāgehi opapātikā nāgā paṇītatarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dragons born spontaneously are better than those born from an egg, from a womb, or from moisture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, catasso nāgayoniyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ways that dragons reproduce.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
