<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>31.13-22-13–22. Mūlagandhadānūpakārasuttadasaka  - 13–22. Ten Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become a Fragrant Root Fairy </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">31.13-22. 13–22. Mūlagandhadānūpakārasuttadasaka  - 13–22. Ten Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become a Fragrant Root Fairy </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Gandhabbavagga  - 1. Fairies </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena sucaritaṃ carati, vācāya sucaritaṃ carati, manasā sucaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, it’s when someone does good things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sutaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they’ve heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mūlagandhe adhivatthā devā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāhaṃ kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjeyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So annaṃ deti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give food … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pānaṃ deti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">drink … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vatthaṃ deti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">clothing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yānaṃ deti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a vehicle … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mālaṃ deti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a garland … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gandhaṃ deti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">fragrance … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vilepanaṃ deti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">makeup … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyaṃ deti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a bed … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āvasathaṃ deti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a house … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padīpeyyaṃ deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a lamp. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live on fragrant scents.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bāvīsatimaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
