<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.40-40. Dutiyapajjunnadhītusuttaṃ  - 40. With Pajjunna’s Daughter (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.40. 40. Dutiyapajjunnadhītusuttaṃ  - 40. With Pajjunna’s Daughter (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Satullapakāyikavagga  - 4. The Satullapa Group </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho cūḷakokanadā pajjunnassa dhītā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ mahāvanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the beautiful Kokanadā the Younger, Pajjunna’s daughter, lighting up the entire Great Wood, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho sā devatā cūḷakokanadā pajjunnassa dhītā bhagavato santike imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and recited these verses in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāgamā vijjupabhāsavaṇṇā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kokanadā, Pajjunna’s daughter, came here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kokanadā pajjunnassa dhītā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">beautiful as a flash of lightning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddhañca dhammañca namassamānā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Revering the Buddha and the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāthācimā atthavatī abhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">she spoke these verses full of meaning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahunāpi kho taṃ vibhajeyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The teaching is such that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariyāyena tādiso dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I could analyze it in many different ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃkhittamatthaṃ lapayissāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">However, I will state the meaning in brief </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā me manasā pariyattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as far as I have learned it by heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāpaṃ na kayirā vacasā manasā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should never do anything bad </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena vā kiñcana sabbaloke; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by speech or mind or body in all the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāme pahāya satimā sampajāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having given up sensual pleasures, mindful and aware, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ na sevetha anatthasaṃhitan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you shouldn’t keep doing what’s painful and pointless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satullapakāyikavaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbhimaccharinā sādhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na santujjhānasaññino; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhā samayo sakalikaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho pajjunnadhītaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
