<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.11-11. Nandanasutta  - 11. The Garden of Delight </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.11. 11. Nandanasutta  - 11. The Garden of Delight </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nandanavagga  - 2. The Garden of Delight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, aññatarā tāvatiṃsakāyikā devatā nandane vane accharāsaṅghaparivutā dibbehi pañcahi kāmaguṇehi samappitā samaṅgībhūtā paricārayamānā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, a certain deity of the company of the Thirty-Three was amusing themselves in the Garden of Delight, escorted by a band of nymphs, and supplied and provided with the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation. On that occasion they recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Na te sukhaṃ pajānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They don’t know pleasure </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye na passanti nandanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who don’t see the Garden of Delight! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āvāsaṃ naradevānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the abode of lordly gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tidasānaṃ yasassinan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the glorious host of Thirty!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhikkhave, aññatarā devatā taṃ devataṃ gāthāya paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they had spoken, another deity replied with this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Na tvaṃ bāle pajānāsi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Fool, don’t you understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā arahataṃ vaco; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the saying of the perfected ones: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccā sabbasaṅkhārā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">All conditions are impermanent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppādavayadhammino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their nature is to rise and fall; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppajjitvā nirujjhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having arisen, they cease; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṃ vūpasamo sukho’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their stilling is true bliss.’”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
