<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.38-38. Sakalikasutta  - 38. A Splinter </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.38. 38. Sakalikasutta  - 38. A Splinter </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Satullapakāyikavagga  - 4. The Satullapa Group </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati maddakucchismiṃ migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in the Maddakucchi deer park. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavato pādo sakalikāya khato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha’s foot had been cut by a splinter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhusā sudaṃ bhagavato vedanā vattanti sārīrikā vedanā dukkhā tibbā kharā kaṭukā asātā amanāpā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha was stricken by harrowing pains; physical feelings that were painful, sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, and disagreeable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tā sudaṃ bhagavā sato sampajāno adhivāseti avihaññamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But he endured with mindfulness and situational awareness, without worrying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā catugguṇaṃ saṅghāṭiṃ paññāpetvā dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyyaṃ kappeti pāde pādaṃ accādhāya sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then he spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sattasatā satullapakāyikā devatāyo abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ maddakucchiṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, several glorious deities of the Satullapa Group, lighting up the entire Maddukucchi, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho ekā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Standing to one side, one deity was inspired to exclaim in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāgo vata, bho, samaṇo gotamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama is such an elephant, sir! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāgavatā ca samuppannā sārīrikā vedanā dukkhā tibbā kharā kaṭukā asātā amanāpā sato sampajāno adhivāseti avihaññamāno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as an elephant, he endures painful physical feelings that have come up—sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, and disagreeable—with mindfulness and situational awareness, without worrying.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity was inspired to exclaim in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sīho vata, bho, samaṇo gotamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama is such a lion, sir! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīhavatā ca samuppannā sārīrikā vedanā dukkhā tibbā kharā kaṭukā asātā amanāpā sato sampajāno adhivāseti avihaññamāno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as a lion, he endures painful physical feelings … without worrying.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity was inspired to exclaim in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ājānīyo vata, bho, samaṇo gotamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama is such a thoroughbred, sir! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ājānīyavatā ca samuppannā sārīrikā vedanā dukkhā tibbā kharā kaṭukā asātā amanāpā sato sampajāno adhivāseti avihaññamāno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as a thoroughbred, he endures painful physical feelings … without worrying.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity was inspired to exclaim in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nisabho vata, bho, samaṇo gotamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama is such a chief bull, sir! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nisabhavatā ca samuppannā sārīrikā vedanā dukkhā tibbā kharā kaṭukā asātā amanāpā sato sampajāno adhivāseti avihaññamāno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as a chief bull, he endures painful physical feelings … without worrying.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity was inspired to exclaim in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dhorayho vata, bho, samaṇo gotamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama is such a behemoth, sir! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhorayhavatā ca samuppannā sārīrikā vedanā dukkhā tibbā kharā kaṭukā asātā amanāpā sato sampajāno adhivāseti avihaññamāno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as a behemoth, he endures painful physical feelings … without worrying.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity was inspired to exclaim in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“danto vata, bho, samaṇo gotamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama is truly tamed, sir! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dantavatā ca samuppannā sārīrikā vedanā dukkhā tibbā kharā kaṭukā asātā amanāpā sato sampajāno adhivāseti avihaññamāno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as someone tamed, he endures painful physical feelings … without worrying.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity was inspired to exclaim in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passa samādhiṃ subhāvitaṃ cittañca suvimuttaṃ, na cābhinataṃ na cāpanataṃ na ca sasaṅkhāraniggayhavāritagataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“See, his immersion is so well developed, and his mind is so well freed—not leaning forward or pulling back, and not held in place by forceful suppression. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo evarūpaṃ purisanāgaṃ purisasīhaṃ purisaājānīyaṃ purisanisabhaṃ purisadhorayhaṃ purisadantaṃ atikkamitabbaṃ maññeyya kimaññatra adassanā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If anyone imagines that they can overcome such an elephant of a man, a lion of a man, a thoroughbred of a man, a chief bull of a man, a behemoth of a man, a tamed man—what is that but a failure to see?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcavedā sataṃ samaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Learned in the five Vedas, brahmins practice </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tapassī brāhmaṇā caraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">mortification for a full century. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittañca nesaṃ na sammā vimuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But their minds are not properly freed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hīnattharūpā na pāraṅgamā te. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for those of base character don’t cross to the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhādhipannā vatasīlabaddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seized by craving, attached to precepts and observances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lūkhaṃ tapaṃ vassasataṃ carantā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they practice rough mortification for a hundred years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittañca nesaṃ na sammā vimuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But their minds are not properly freed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hīnattharūpā na pāraṅgamā te. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for those of base character don’t cross to the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na mānakāmassa damo idhatthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who’s fond of conceit can’t be tamed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na monamatthi asamāhitassa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and someone without immersion can’t be a sage. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko araññe viharaṃ pamatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Living negligent alone in the wilderness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na maccudheyyassa tareyya pāran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can’t pass beyond Death’s domain.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mānaṃ pahāya susamāhitatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Having given up conceit, serene within oneself, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sucetaso sabbadhi vippamutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with a healthy heart, everywhere released; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko araññe viharamappamatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">living diligent alone in the wilderness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa maccudheyyassa tareyya pāran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they pass beyond Death’s domain.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
