<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.09-9. Paṭhamasukkāsutta  - 9. With the Nun Sukkā (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.09. 9. Paṭhamasukkāsutta  - 9. With the Nun Sukkā (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Indakavagga  - 1. With Indaka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sukkā bhikkhunī mahatiyā parisāya parivutā dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time the nun Sukkā was teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sukkāya bhikkhuniyā abhippasanno yakkho rājagahe rathikāya rathikaṃ siṅghāṭakena siṅghāṭakaṃ upasaṅkamitvā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a native spirit was so devoted to Sukkā that he went street to street and square to square, and on that occasion recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ me katā rājagahe manussā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s up with these people in Rājagaha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Madhupītāva seyare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They sleep like they’ve been drinking mead! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye sukkaṃ na payirupāsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t attend on Sukkā </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Desentiṃ amataṃ padaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as she’s teaching the deathless state. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañca pana appaṭivānīyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the wise—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asecanakamojavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s as if they drink it up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pivanti maññe sappaññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">so irresistible, delicious, and nutritious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Valāhakamiva panthagū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like travelers enjoying a cool cloud.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
