<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.08-8. Sudattasutta  - 8. With Sudatta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.08. 8. Sudattasutta  - 8. With Sudatta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Indakavagga  - 1. With Indaka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati sītavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in the Cool Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati rājagahaṃ anuppatto hoti kenacideva karaṇīyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the householder Anāthapiṇḍika had arrived at Rājagaha on some business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He heard </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“buddho kira loke uppanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a rumor that a Buddha had arisen in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāvadeva ca pana bhagavantaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkamitukāmo hoti. Athassa anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right away he wanted to go and see the Buddha, but he thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“akālo kho ajja bhagavantaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkamituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s too late to go and see the Buddha today. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sve dānāhaṃ kālena bhagavantaṃ dassanāya gamissāmī”ti buddhagatāya satiyā nipajji. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll go and see him tomorrow.” He went to bed thinking of the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattiyā sudaṃ tikkhattuṃ vuṭṭhāsi pabhātanti maññamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">During the night he got up three times thinking it was morning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena sivathikadvāraṃ tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he approached the Sivaka Gate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amanussā dvāraṃ vivariṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and non-human beings opened it for him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa nagaramhā nikkhamantassa āloko antaradhāyi, andhakāro pāturahosi, bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃso udapādi, tatova puna nivattitukāmo ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But as he was leaving the city, light vanished and darkness appeared to him. He felt fear, terror, and goosebumps, and wanted to turn back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sivako yakkho antarahito saddamanussāvesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the invisible spirit Sivaka called out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sataṃ hatthī sataṃ assā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A hundred elephants, a hundred horses, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sataṃ assatarīrathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a hundred mule-drawn chariots, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sataṃ kaññāsahassāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a hundred thousand maidens </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmukkamaṇikuṇḍalā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">bedecked with jewels and earrings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekassa padavītihārassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these are not worth a sixteenth part </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalaṃ nāgghanti soḷasiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of a single forward stride! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkama gahapati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Forward, householder! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhikkama gahapati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Forward, householder! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkamanaṃ te seyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going forward is better for you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no paṭikkamanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not turning back!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa andhakāro antaradhāyi, āloko pāturahosi, yaṃ ahosi bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃso, so paṭippassambhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then darkness vanished and light appeared to Anāthapiṇḍika. His fear, terror, and goosebumps settled down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa āloko antaradhāyi, andhakāro pāturahosi, bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃso udapādi, tatova puna nivattitukāmo ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But for a second time, light vanished and darkness appeared to him. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho sivako yakkho antarahito saddamanussāvesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time the invisible spirit Sivaka called out … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sataṃ hatthī sataṃ assā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalaṃ nāgghanti soḷasiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkama gahapati, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhikkama gahapati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkamanaṃ te seyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… Going forward is better for you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no paṭikkamanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not turning back!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa andhakāro antaradhāyi, āloko pāturahosi, yaṃ ahosi bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃso, so paṭippassambhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then darkness vanished and light appeared to Anāthapiṇḍika. His fear, terror, and goosebumps settled down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa āloko antaradhāyi, andhakāro pāturahosi, bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃso udapādi, tatova puna nivattitukāmo ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But for a third time, light vanished and darkness appeared to him. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho sivako yakkho antarahito saddamanussāvesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a third time the invisible spirit Sivaka called out … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sataṃ hatthī sataṃ assā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalaṃ nāgghanti soḷasiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkama gahapati, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhikkama gahapati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkamanaṃ te seyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… Going forward is better for you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no paṭikkamanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not turning back!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa andhakāro antaradhāyi, āloko pāturahosi, yaṃ ahosi bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃso, so paṭippassambhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then darkness vanished and light appeared to Anāthapiṇḍika. His fear, terror, and goosebumps settled down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena sītavanaṃ yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went to the Cool Grove and approached the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā rattiyā paccūsasamayaṃ paccuṭṭhāya abbhokāse caṅkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha had risen at the crack of dawn and was walking meditation in the open. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He saw Anāthapiṇḍika coming off in the distance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna caṅkamā orohitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So he stepped down from the walking path, sat down on the seat spread out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to Anāthapiṇḍika, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi, sudattā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Sudatta.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati, nāmena maṃ bhagavā ālapatīti, haṭṭho udaggo tattheva bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Anāthapiṇḍika thought, “The Buddha calls me by name!” Smiling and joyful, he bowed with his head to the Buddha’s feet and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, bhante, bhagavā sukhamasayitthā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I trust the Buddha slept well?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sabbadā ve sukhaṃ seti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A brahmin who is fully extinguished </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brāhmaṇo parinibbuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">always sleeps well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo na limpati kāmesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual pleasures slide off them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sītibhūto nirūpadhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re cooled, free of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbā āsattiyo chetvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since they’ve cut off all clinging, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vineyya hadaye daraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and removed the stress from the heart, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasanto sukhaṃ seti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the peaceful sleep well, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santiṃ pappuyya cetasā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">abiding in peace of mind.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
