<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.12-12. Āḷavakasutta  - 12. With Āḷavaka </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.12. 12. Āḷavakasutta  - 12. With Āḷavaka </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Indakavagga  - 1. With Indaka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā āḷaviyaṃ viharati āḷavakassa yakkhassa bhavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Āḷavī in the haunt of the native spirit Āḷavaka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āḷavako yakkho yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the native spirit Āḷavaka went up to the Buddha, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nikkhama, samaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get out, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhāvuso”ti bhagavā nikkhami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “All right, sir,” the Buddha went out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pavisa, samaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get in, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhāvuso”ti bhagavā pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “All right, sir,” the Buddha went in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho āḷavako yakkho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a second time the native spirit Āḷavaka said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nikkhama, samaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get out, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhāvuso”ti bhagavā nikkhami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “All right, sir,” the Buddha went out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pavisa, samaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get in, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhāvuso”ti bhagavā pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “All right, sir,” the Buddha went in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho āḷavako yakkho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time the native spirit Āḷavaka said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nikkhama, samaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get out, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhāvuso”ti bhagavā nikkhami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “All right, sir,” the Buddha went out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pavisa, samaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get in, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhāvuso”ti bhagavā pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “All right, sir,” the Buddha went in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthampi kho āḷavako yakkho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a fourth time the native spirit Āḷavaka said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nikkhama, samaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get out, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvāhaṃ taṃ, āvuso, nikkhamissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir, I won’t get out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ te karaṇīyaṃ taṃ karohī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Do whatever you have to do.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañhaṃ taṃ, samaṇa, pucchissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I will ask you a question, ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace me na byākarissasi, cittaṃ vā te khipissāmi, hadayaṃ vā te phālessāmi, pādesu vā gahetvā pāragaṅgāya khipissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t answer me, I’ll drive you insane, or explode your heart, or grab you by the feet and throw you to the far shore of the Ganges!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvāhaṃ taṃ, āvuso, passāmi sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya, yo me cittaṃ vā khipeyya hadayaṃ vā phāleyya, pādesu vā gahetvā pāragaṅgāya khipeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t see anyone in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans who could do that to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca tvaṃ, āvuso, puccha yadā kaṅkhasī”ti (). </span></p>
<p class="p3">But anyway, ask what you wish.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃsūdha vittaṃ purisassa seṭṭhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s a person’s best wealth? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃsu suciṇṇaṃ sukhamāvahāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What brings happiness when practiced well? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃsu have sādutaraṃ rasānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s the sweetest taste of all? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃjīviṃ jīvitamāhu seṭṭhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The one who they say has the best life: how do they live?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddhīdha vittaṃ purisassa seṭṭhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Faith here is a person’s best wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammo suciṇṇo sukhamāvahāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The teaching brings happiness when practiced well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṃ have sādutaraṃ rasānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Truth is the sweetest taste of all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññājīviṃ jīvitamāhu seṭṭhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The one who they say has the best life lives by wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃsu tarati oghaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How do you cross the flood? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃsu tarati aṇṇavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you cross the deluge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃsu dukkhamacceti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you get over suffering? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃsu parisujjhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you get purified?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddhāya tarati oghaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“By faith you cross the flood, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamādena aṇṇavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and by diligence the deluge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyena dukkhamacceti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By energy you get past suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāya parisujjhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and you’re purified by wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃsu labhate paññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How do you get wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃsu vindate dhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you earn wealth? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃsu kittiṃ pappoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you get a good reputation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃ mittāni ganthati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you hold on to friends? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asmā lokā paraṃ lokaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do the departed not grieve </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃ pecca na socatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when passing from this world to the next?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddahāno arahataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“One who is diligent and discerning </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammaṃ nibbānapattiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">gains wisdom by wanting to learn, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sussūsaṃ labhate paññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having faith in the perfected ones, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamatto vicakkhaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teaching for becoming extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpakārī dhuravā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being responsible, acting appropriately, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uṭṭhātā vindate dhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and working hard you earn wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccena kittiṃ pappoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Truthfulness wins you a good reputation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadaṃ mittāni ganthati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You hold on to friends by giving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asmā lokā paraṃ lokaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the departed do not grieve </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ pecca na socati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when passing from this world to the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassete caturo dhammā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A faithful householder </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhassa gharamesino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has these four qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṃ dhammo dhiti cāgo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">does not grieve after passing away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sa ve pecca na socati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">truth, principle, steadfastness, and generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iṅgha aññepi pucchassu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Go ahead, ask others as well, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puthū samaṇabrāhmaṇe; </span></p>
<p class="p3">there are many ascetics and brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saccā dhammā cāgā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">See whether anything better is found </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khantyā bhiyyodha vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">than truth, self-control, generosity, and patience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ nu dāni puccheyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why now would I question </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puthū samaṇabrāhmaṇe; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the many ascetics and brahmins? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yohaṃ ajja pajānāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Today I understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo attho samparāyiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what’s good for the next life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthāya vata me buddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It was truly for my benefit </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsāyāḷavimāgamā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that the Buddha came to stay at Āḷavī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yohaṃ ajja pajānāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Today I understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where a gift is very fruitful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ahaṃ vicarissāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I myself will journey </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāmā gāmaṃ purā puraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">village to village, town to town, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Namassamāno sambuddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">paying homage to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammassa ca sudhammatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the natural excellence of the teaching!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indakavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indako sakka sūci ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maṇibhaddo ca sānu ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyaṅkara punabbasu sudatto ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve sukkā cīraāḷavīti dvādasa. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yakkhasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses with Native Spirits are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
