<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.16-16. Yajamānasutta  - 16. Sponsoring Sacrifice </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.16. 16. Yajamānasutta  - 16. Sponsoring Sacrifice </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sakko devānamindo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Sakka, lord of gods, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho sakko devānamindo bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yajamānānaṃ manussānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“For humans, those merit-seeking creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puññapekkhāna pāṇinaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who sponsor sacrifices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karotaṃ opadhikaṃ puññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">making merit with attachments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kattha dinnaṃ mahapphalan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where is a gift very fruitful?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattāro ca paṭipannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Four practicing the path, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro ca phale ṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and four established in the fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esa saṅgho ujubhūto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the upright Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāsīlasamāhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with wisdom, ethics, and immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yajamānānaṃ manussānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For humans, those merit-seeking creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññapekkhāna pāṇinaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who sponsor sacrifices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karotaṃ opadhikaṃ puññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">making merit with attachments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe dinnaṃ mahapphalan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what is given to the Saṅgha is very fruitful.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
