<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.05-5. Subhāsitajayasutta  - 5. Victory by Good Speech </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.05. 5. Subhāsitajayasutta  - 5. Victory by Good Speech </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, devāsurasaṅgāmo samupabyūḷho ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, a battle was fought between the gods and the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vepacitti, lord of demons, said to Sakka, lord of gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘hotu, devānaminda, subhāsitena jayo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Lord of gods, let there be victory by fine words!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Hotu, vepacitti, subhāsitena jayo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Vepacitti, let there be victory by fine words!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, devā ca asurā ca pārisajje ṭhapesuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the gods and the demons appointed a panel of judges, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ime no subhāsitadubbhāsitaṃ ājānissantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘These will understand our good and bad statements.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vepacitti, lord of demons, said to Sakka, lord of gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhaṇa, devānaminda, gāthan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Lord of gods, recite a verse!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo vepacittiṃ asurindaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Sakka said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tumhe khvettha, vepacitti, pubbadevā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Vepacitti, you are the elder god here. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaṇa, vepacitti, gāthan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recite a verse.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Vepacitti recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Bhiyyo bālā pabhijjeyyuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Fools would vent even more </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no cassa paṭisedhako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if there’s no-one to put a stop to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā bhusena daṇḍena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So an intelligent person should stop </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhīro bālaṃ nisedhaye’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a fool with forceful punishment.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsitāya kho pana, bhikkhave, vepacittinā asurindena gāthāya asurā anumodiṃsu, devā tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The demons applauded Vepacitti’s verse, while the gods remained silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vepacitti said to Sakka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhaṇa, devānaminda, gāthan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Lord of gods, recite a verse!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Sakka recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Etadeva ahaṃ maññe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I think that this is the only way </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bālassa paṭisedhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to put a stop to a fool, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paraṃ saṅkupitaṃ ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">when you know that the other is upset, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo sato upasammatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">be mindful and stay calm.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsitāya kho pana, bhikkhave, sakkena devānamindena gāthāya, devā anumodiṃsu, asurā tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gods applauded Sakka’s verse, while the demons remained silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo vepacittiṃ asurindaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka said to Vepacitti, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhaṇa, vepacitti, gāthan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Vepacitti, recite a verse!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Vepacitti recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Etadeva titikkhāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I see this fault, Vāsava, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vajjaṃ passāmi vāsava; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in just being patient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā naṃ maññati bālo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a fool thinks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhayā myāyaṃ titikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He puts up with me out of fear,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhāruhati dummedho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the idiot will go after you even harder, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gova bhiyyo palāyinan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a cow chasing someone who runs away.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsitāya kho pana, bhikkhave, vepacittinā asurindena gāthāya asurā anumodiṃsu, devā tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The demons applauded Vepacitti’s verse, while the gods remained silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vepacitti said to Sakka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhaṇa, devānaminda, gāthan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Lord of gods, recite a verse!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Sakka recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kāmaṃ maññatu vā mā vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Let him think this if he wishes, or not—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhayā myāyaṃ titikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He puts up with me out of fear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadatthaparamā atthā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of goals culminating in one’s own good, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khantyā bhiyyo na vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">none better than patience is found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo have balavā santo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a strong person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbalassa titikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">puts up with a weakling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamāhu paramaṃ khantiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they call that the ultimate patience, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niccaṃ khamati dubbalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for a weakling must always be patient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abalaṃ taṃ balaṃ āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The strength of folly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa bālabalaṃ balaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is really just weakness, they say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Balassa dhammaguttassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But no-one can challenge a person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭivattā na vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s strong, guarded by the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva tena pāpiyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you get angry at an angry person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo kuddhaṃ paṭikujjhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you just make things worse for yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuddhaṃ appaṭikujjhanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you don’t get angry at an angry person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgāmaṃ jeti dujjayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you win a battle hard to win. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhinnamatthaṃ carati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you know that the other is angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ca parassa ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you act for the good of both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paraṃ saṅkupitaṃ ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">yourself and the other </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo sato upasammati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you’re mindful and stay calm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhinnaṃ tikicchantānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">People unfamiliar with the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ca parassa ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">consider one who heals both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Janā maññanti bāloti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">oneself and the other </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye dhammassa akovidā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to be a fool.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsitāsu kho pana, bhikkhave, sakkena devānamindena gāthāsu, devā anumodiṃsu, asurā tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gods applauded Sakka’s verses, while the demons remained silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, devānañca asurānañca pārisajjā etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the panel of judges consisting of both gods and demons said this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhāsitā kho vepacittinā asurindena gāthāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The verses spoken by Vepacitti </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā ca kho sadaṇḍāvacarā sasatthāvacarā, iti bhaṇḍanaṃ iti viggaho iti kalaho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">evoke punishment and violence. That’s how you get arguments, quarrels, and disputes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsitā kho sakkena devānamindena gāthāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The verses spoken by Sakka </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā ca kho adaṇḍāvacarā asatthāvacarā, iti abhaṇḍanaṃ iti aviggaho iti akalaho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t evoke punishment and violence. That’s how you stay free of arguments, quarrels, and disputes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkassa devānamindassa subhāsitena jayo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka, lord of gods, wins victory by fine words!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, sakkassa devānamindassa subhāsitena jayo ahosī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s how Sakka came to win victory by fine words.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
