<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.13-13. Mahālisutta  - 13. With Mahāli </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.13. 13. Mahālisutta  - 13. With Mahāli </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahāli licchavī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho mahāli licchavī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahāli the Licchavi went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Diṭṭho kho, bhante, bhagavatā sakko devānamindo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, have you seen Sakka, lord of gods?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Diṭṭho kho me, mahāli, sakko devānamindo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have, Mahāli.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“So hi nūna, bhante, sakkapatirūpako bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But surely, sir, you must have seen someone who looked like Sakka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duddaso hi, bhante, sakko devānamindo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For Sakka is hard to see.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkañca khvāhaṃ, mahāli, pajānāmi sakkakaraṇe ca dhamme, yesaṃ dhammānaṃ samādinnattā sakko sakkattaṃ ajjhagā, tañca pajānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mahāli, I understand Sakka. And I understand the things that he undertook and committed to, which enabled him to achieve the status of Sakka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, mahāli, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno magho nāma māṇavo ahosi, tasmā maghavāti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he was a brahmanical student named Magha. That’s why he’s called Maghavā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, mahāli, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno sakkaccaṃ dānaṃ adāsi, tasmā sakkoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts carefully. That’s why he’s called Sakka, the careful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, mahāli, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno pure dānaṃ adāsi, tasmā purindadoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts in stronghold after stronghold. That’s why he’s called Purindada, the stronghold-giver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, mahāli, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno āvasathaṃ adāsi, tasmā vāsavoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave the gift of a guest house. That’s why he’s called Vāsava, the houser. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, mahāli, devānamindo sahassampi atthānaṃ muhuttena cinteti, tasmā sahassakkhoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka thinks of a thousand things in a moment. That’s why he’s called Sahassakkha, Thousand-Eye. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkassa, mahāli, devānamindassa sujā nāma asurakaññā pajāpati, tasmā sujampatīti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka’s wife is the demon maiden named Sujā. That’s why he’s called Sujampati, Sujā’s husband. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, mahāli, devānamindo devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ issariyādhipaccaṃ rajjaṃ kāreti, tasmā devānamindoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka rules as sovereign lord over the gods of the Thirty-Three. That’s why he’s called lord of gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkassa, mahāli, devānamindassa pubbe manussabhūtassa satta vatapadāni samattāni samādinnāni ahesuṃ, yesaṃ samādinnattā sakko sakkattaṃ ajjhagā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni satta vatapadāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvajīvaṃ mātāpettibharo assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I support my parents. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ kule jeṭṭhāpacāyī assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I honor the elders in the family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ saṇhavāco assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I speak gently. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ apisuṇavāco assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I not speak divisively. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvaseyyaṃ muttacāgo payatapāṇi vossaggarato yācayogo dānasaṃvibhāgarato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ saccavāco assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I speak the truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ akkodhano assaṃ—sacepi me kodho uppajjeyya, khippameva naṃ paṭivineyyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I be free of anger, or should anger arise, may I quickly get rid of it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkassa, mahāli, devānamindassa pubbe manussabhūtassa imāni satta vatapadāni samattāni samādinnāni ahesuṃ, yesaṃ samādinnattā sakko sakkattaṃ ajjhagāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātāpettibharaṃ jantuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who respects their parents, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kule jeṭṭhāpacāyinaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and honors the elders in the family, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṇhaṃ sakhilasambhāsaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose speech is gentle and courteous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pesuṇeyyappahāyinaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has given up divisiveness; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maccheravinaye yuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s committed to getting rid of stinginess, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saccaṃ kodhābhibhuṃ naraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is truthful, and has mastered anger: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ ve devā tāvatiṃsā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the gods of the Thirty-Three </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āhu sappuriso itī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">call them truly a good person.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
