<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.09-9. Araññāyatanaisisutta  - 9. Hermits in the Wilderness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.09. 9. Araññāyatanaisisutta  - 9. Hermits in the Wilderness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, sambahulā isayo sīlavanto kalyāṇadhammā araññāyatane paṇṇakuṭīsu sammanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, several hermits who were ethical, of good character, settled in leaf huts in a wilderness region. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko ca devānamindo vepacitti ca asurindo yena te isayo sīlavanto kalyāṇadhammā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka, lord of gods, and Vepacitti, lord of demons, went to those hermits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo paṭaliyo upāhanā ārohitvā khaggaṃ olaggetvā chattena dhāriyamānena aggadvārena assamaṃ pavisitvā te isayo sīlavante kalyāṇadhamme apabyāmato karitvā atikkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Vepacitti put on his boots, strapped on his sword, and, carrying a sunshade, entered the hermitage through the main gate. He walked right past those hermits, keeping them at a distance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo paṭaliyo upāhanā orohitvā khaggaṃ aññesaṃ datvā chattaṃ apanāmetvā dvāreneva assamaṃ pavisitvā te isayo sīlavante kalyāṇadhamme anuvātaṃ pañjaliko namassamāno aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka took off his boots, gave his sword to others, and, putting down his sunshade, entered the hermitage through a gate he happened upon. He stood downwind of those hermits, revering them with joined palms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, te isayo sīlavanto kalyāṇadhammā sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsiṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those hermits addressed Sakka in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Gandho isīnaṃ ciradikkhitānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When hermits have been long ordained, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyā cuto gacchati mālutena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the odor of their bodies goes with the wind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ito paṭikkamma sahassanetta, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’d better leave, O thousand-eyed! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gandho isīnaṃ asuci devarājā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The odor of the hermits is unclean, king of gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Gandho isīnaṃ ciradikkhitānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When hermits have been long ordained, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyā cuto gacchatu mālutena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">let the odor of their bodies go with the wind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sucitrapupphaṃ sirasmiṃva mālaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We yearn for this odor, sirs, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gandhaṃ etaṃ paṭikaṅkhāma bhante; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a colorful crown of flowers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hettha devā paṭikūlasaññino’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gods don’t see it as repulsive.’”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
