<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.12-12. Sakkanāmasutta  - 12. Sakka’s Names </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.12. 12. Sakkanāmasutta  - 12. Sakka’s Names </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ jetavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha said to the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno magho nāma māṇavo ahosi, tasmā maghavāti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he was a brahmanical student named Magha. That’s why he’s called Maghavā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno pure dānaṃ adāsi, tasmā purindadoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts in stronghold after stronghold. That’s why he’s called Purindada, the Stronghold-Giver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno sakkaccaṃ dānaṃ adāsi, tasmā sakkoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts carefully. That’s why he’s called Sakka, the Careful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno āvasathaṃ adāsi, tasmā vāsavoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave the gift of a guest house. That’s why he’s called Vāsava, the Houser. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo sahassampi atthānaṃ muhuttena cinteti, tasmā sahassakkhoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka thinks of a thousand things in a moment. That’s why he’s called Sahassakkha, the Thousand-Eye. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkassa, bhikkhave, devānamindassa sujā nāma asurakaññā pajāpati, tasmā sujampatīti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka’s wife is the demon maiden named Sujā. That’s why he’s called Sujampati, Sujā’s Husband. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ issariyādhipaccaṃ rajjaṃ kāreti, tasmā devānamindoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka rules as sovereign lord over the gods of the Thirty-Three. That’s why he’s called lord of gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkassa, bhikkhave, devānamindassa pubbe manussabhūtassa satta vatapadāni samattāni samādinnāni ahesuṃ, yesaṃ samādinnattā sakko sakkattaṃ ajjhagā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni satta vatapadāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvajīvaṃ mātāpettibharo assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I support my parents. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ kule jeṭṭhāpacāyī assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I honor the elders in the family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ saṇhavāco assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I speak gently. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ apisuṇavāco assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I not speak divisively. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvaseyyaṃ muttacāgo payatapāṇi vossaggarato yācayogo dānasaṃvibhāgarato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ saccavāco assaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I speak the truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvaṃ akkodhano assaṃ—sacepi me kodho uppajjeyya, khippameva naṃ paṭivineyyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I live, may I be free of anger, or should anger arise, may I quickly get rid of it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkassa, bhikkhave, devānamindassa pubbe manussabhūtassa imāni satta vatapadāni samattāni samādinnāni ahesuṃ, yesaṃ samādinnattā sakko sakkattaṃ ajjhagāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātāpettibharaṃ jantuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who respects their parents, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kule jeṭṭhāpacāyinaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and honors the elders in the family, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṇhaṃ sakhilasambhāsaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose speech is gentle and courteous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pesuṇeyyappahāyinaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has given up divisiveness; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maccheravinaye yuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s committed to getting rid of stinginess, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saccaṃ kodhābhibhuṃ naraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is truthful, and has mastered anger: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ ve devā tāvatiṃsā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the gods of the Thirty-Three </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āhu sappuriso itī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">call them truly a good person.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
