<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.06-6. Kulāvakasutta  - 6. Bird Nests </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.06. 6. Kulāvakasutta  - 6. Bird Nests </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, devāsurasaṅgāmo samupabyūḷho ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, a battle was fought between the gods and the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ kho pana, bhikkhave, saṅgāme asurā jiniṃsu, devā parājiniṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In that battle the demons won and the gods lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parājitā ca kho, bhikkhave, devā apāyaṃsveva uttarenamukhā, abhiyaṃsveva ne asurā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Defeated, the gods fled north with the demons in pursuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo mātali saṅgāhakaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed his charioteer Mātali in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kulāvakā mātali simbalismiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Mātali, don’t ram the bird nests </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Īsāmukhena parivajjayassu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the red silk-cotton woods with your chariot pole. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaṃ cajāma asuresu pāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’d rather give up our lives to the demons </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māyime dijā vikulāvakā ahesun’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">than deprive these birds of their nests.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃ, bhaddantavā’ti kho, bhikkhave, mātali saṅgāhako sakkassa devānamindassa paṭissutvā sahassayuttaṃ ājaññarathaṃ paccudāvattesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Yes, lord,’ replied Mātali. And he turned the chariot back around, with its team of a thousand thoroughbreds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, asurānaṃ etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the demons thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paccudāvatto kho dāni sakkassa devānamindassa sahassayutto ājaññaratho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Now Sakka’s chariot has turned back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho devā asurehi saṅgāmessantī’ti bhītā asurapurameva pāvisiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The demons will have to fight the gods a second time!’ Terrified, they retreated right away to the castle of the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, sakkassa devānamindassa dhammena jayo ahosī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s how Sakka came to win victory by principle.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
