<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.14-14. Daliddasutta  - 14. Poor </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.14. 14. Daliddasutta  - 14. Poor </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, aññataro puriso imasmiṃyeva rājagahe manussadaliddo ahosi manussakapaṇo manussavarāko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a poor person, impoverished and pitiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye saddhaṃ samādiyi, sīlaṃ samādiyi, sutaṃ samādiyi, cāgaṃ samādiyi, paññaṃ samādiyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They took up faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye saddhaṃ samādiyitvā sīlaṃ samādiyitvā sutaṃ samādiyitvā cāgaṃ samādiyitvā paññaṃ samādiyitvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajji devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ sahabyataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After undertaking these things, when their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, in the company of the gods of the Thirty-Three. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aññe deve atirocati vaṇṇena ceva yasasā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There they outshone the other gods in beauty and glory. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra sudaṃ, bhikkhave, devā tāvatiṃsā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the gods of the Thirty-Three complained, grumbled, and objected, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘acchariyaṃ vata bho, abbhutaṃ vata bho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s incredible, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayañhi devaputto pubbe manussabhūto samāno manussadaliddo ahosi manussakapaṇo manussavarāko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For when this god was a human being in their past life they were poor, impoverished, and pitiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapanno devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ sahabyataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, in the company of the gods of the Thirty-Three. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aññe deve atirocati vaṇṇena ceva yasasā cā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here they outshine the other gods in beauty and glory.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo deve tāvatiṃse āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the gods of the Thirty-Three, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā kho tumhe, mārisā, etassa devaputtassa ujjhāyittha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Good sirs, don’t complain about this god. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso kho, mārisā, devaputto pubbe manussabhūto samāno tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye saddhaṃ samādiyi, sīlaṃ samādiyi, sutaṃ samādiyi, cāgaṃ samādiyi, paññaṃ samādiyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this god was a human being in their past life they took up faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye saddhaṃ samādiyitvā sīlaṃ samādiyitvā sutaṃ samādiyitvā cāgaṃ samādiyitvā paññaṃ samādiyitvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapanno devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ sahabyataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After undertaking these things, when their body broke up, after death, they’ve been reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, in the company of the gods of the Thirty-Three. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aññe deve atirocati vaṇṇena ceva yasasā cā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here they outshine the other gods in beauty and glory.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo deve tāvatiṃse anunayamāno tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of the Thirty-Three, recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yassa saddhā tathāgate, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Whoever has faith in the Realized One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acalā suppatiṭṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">unwavering and well grounded; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlañca yassa kalyāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose ethical conduct is good, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantaṃ pasaṃsitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">praised and loved by the noble ones; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe pasādo yassatthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has confidence in the Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujubhūtañca dassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and correct view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaliddoti taṃ āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re said to be prosperous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amoghaṃ tassa jīvitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their life is not in vain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā saddhañca sīlañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So let the wise devote themselves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasādaṃ dhammadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to faith, ethical behaviour, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyuñjetha medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">confidence, and insight into the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saraṃ buddhāna sāsanan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.’”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
