<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.17-17. Buddhavandanāsutta  - 17. Homage to the Buddha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.17. 17. Buddhavandanāsutta  - 17. Homage to the Buddha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ jetavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā divāvihāragato hoti paṭisallīno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha had gone into retreat for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sakko ca devānamindo brahmā ca sahampati yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā paccekaṃ dvārabāhaṃ nissāya aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka, lord of gods, and Brahmā Sahampati approached the Buddha and stationed themselves one by each door-post. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sakko devānamindo bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Uṭṭhehi vīra vijitasaṅgāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rise, hero! Victor in battle, with burden put down, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pannabhāra anaṇa vicara loke; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wander the world without obligation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittañca te suvimuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your mind is fully liberated, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cando yathā pannarasāya rattin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the moon on the fifteenth night.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, devānaminda, tathāgatā evaṃ vanditabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Lord of gods, that’s not how to pay homage to the Realized Ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca kho, devānaminda, tathāgatā vanditabbā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how it should be done: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Uṭṭhehi vīra vijitasaṅgāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Rise, hero! Victor in battle, leader of the caravan, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthavāha anaṇa vicara loke; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wander the world without obligation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Desassu bhagavā dhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātāro bhavissantī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There will be those who understand!’”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
