<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.04-4. Vepacittisutta  - 4. With Vepacitti </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.04. 4. Vepacittisutta  - 4. With Vepacitti </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, devāsurasaṅgāmo samupabyūḷho ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, a battle was fought between the gods and the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo asure āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vepacitti, lord of demons, addressed the demons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace, mārisā, devānaṃ asurasaṅgāme samupabyūḷhe asurā jineyyuṃ devā parājineyyuṃ, yena naṃ sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ kaṇṭhapañcamehi bandhanehi bandhitvā mama santike āneyyātha asurapuran’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My good sirs, if the demons defeat the gods in this battle, bind Sakka, the lord of gods, by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the castle of demons.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkopi kho, bhikkhave, devānamindo deve tāvatiṃse āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Meanwhile, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the gods of the Thirty-Three, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace, mārisā, devānaṃ asurasaṅgāme samupabyūḷhe devā jineyyuṃ asurā parājineyyuṃ, yena naṃ vepacittiṃ asurindaṃ kaṇṭhapañcamehi bandhanehi bandhitvā mama santike āneyyātha sudhammasabhan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My good sirs, if the gods defeat the demons in this battle, bind Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the Sudhamma hall of the gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ kho pana, bhikkhave, saṅgāme devā jiniṃsu, asurā parājiniṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In that battle the gods won and the demons lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, devā tāvatiṃsā vepacittiṃ asurindaṃ kaṇṭhapañcamehi bandhanehi bandhitvā sakkassa devānamindassa santike ānesuṃ sudhammasabhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the gods of the Thirty-Three bound Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and brought him to Sakka’s presence in the Sudhamma hall of the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra sudaṃ, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo kaṇṭhapañcamehi bandhanehi baddho sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ sudhammasabhaṃ pavisantañca nikkhamantañca asabbhāhi pharusāhi vācāhi akkosati paribhāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as Sakka was entering and leaving the hall, Vepacitti abused and insulted him with rude, harsh words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, mātali saṅgāhako sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Mātali the charioteer addressed Sakka in verse, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Bhayā nu maghavā sakka, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘O Maghavā, O Sakka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbalyā no titikkhasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is it from fear or from weakness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇanto pharusaṃ vācaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that you put up with such harsh words </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammukhā vepacittino’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the presence of Vepacitti?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Nāhaṃ bhayā na dubbalyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s not out of fear or weakness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khamāmi vepacittino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I’m patient with Vepacitti. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi mādiso viññū, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For how can a sensible person like me </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bālena paṭisaṃyuje’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">get in a fight with a fool?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Bhiyyo bālā pabhijjeyyuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Fools would vent even more </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no cassa paṭisedhako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if there’s no-one to put a stop to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā bhusena daṇḍena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So a wise one should stop </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhīro bālaṃ nisedhaye’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a fool with forceful punishment.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Etadeva ahaṃ maññe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I think that this is the only way </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bālassa paṭisedhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to put a stop to a fool, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paraṃ saṅkupitaṃ ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">when you know that the other is upset, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo sato upasammatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">be mindful and stay calm.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Etadeva titikkhāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I see this fault, Vāsava, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vajjaṃ passāmi vāsava; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in just being patient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā naṃ maññati bālo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a fool thinks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhayā myāyaṃ titikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He puts up with me out of fear,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhāruhati dummedho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the idiot will go after you even harder, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gova bhiyyo palāyinan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a cow chasing someone who runs away.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kāmaṃ maññatu vā mā vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Let him think this if he wishes, or not—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhayā myāyaṃ titikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He puts up with me out of fear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadatthaparamā atthā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of goals culminating in one’s own good, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khantyā bhiyyo na vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">none better than patience is found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo have balavā santo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a strong person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbalassa titikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">puts up with a weakling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamāhu paramaṃ khantiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they call that the ultimate patience, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niccaṃ khamati dubbalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for a weakling must always be patient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abalaṃ taṃ balaṃ āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The strength of folly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa bālabalaṃ balaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is really just weakness, they say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Balassa dhammaguttassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But no-one can challenge a person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭivattā na vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s strong, guarded by the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva tena pāpiyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you get angry at an angry person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo kuddhaṃ paṭikujjhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you just make things worse for yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuddhaṃ appaṭikujjhanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you don’t get angry at an angry person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgāmaṃ jeti dujjayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you win a battle hard to win. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhinnamatthaṃ carati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you know that the other is angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ca parassa ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you act for the good of both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paraṃ saṅkupitaṃ ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">yourself and the other </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo sato upasammati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you’re mindful and stay calm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhinnaṃ tikicchantānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">People unfamiliar with the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ca parassa ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">consider one who heals both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Janā maññanti bāloti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">oneself and the other </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye dhammassa akovidā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to be a fool.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So hi nāma, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo sakaṃ puññaphalaṃ upajīvamāno devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ issariyādhipaccaṃ rajjaṃ kārento khantisoraccassa vaṇṇavādī bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, mendicants, even Sakka, lord of gods—while living off of the fruit of his good and bad deeds, and ruling as sovereign lord over these gods of the Thirty-Three—will speak in praise of patience and gentleness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha kho taṃ, bhikkhave, sobhetha yaṃ tumhe evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitā samānā khamā ca bhaveyyātha soratā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since you have gone forth in such a well explained teaching and training, it would be truly beautiful for you to be patient and gentle!”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
