<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.13-13. Dīghalaṭṭhisutta  - 13. With Dīghalaṭṭhi </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.13. 13. Dīghalaṭṭhisutta  - 13. With Dīghalaṭṭhi </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Anāthapiṇḍikavagga  - 2. With Anāthapiṇḍika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho dīghalaṭṭhi devaputto abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ veḷuvanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the glorious god Dīghalaṭṭhi, lighting up the entire Bamboo Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho dīghalaṭṭhi devaputto bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhu siyā jhāyī vimuttacitto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suppose a mendicant is a meditator, freed in mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkhe ce hadayassānupattiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they want to reach the heart’s peace, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokassa ñatvā udayabbayañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having known the arising and passing of the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sucetaso anissito tadānisaṃso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">healthy-minded, independent, that is their reward.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
