<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.03-3. Māghasutta  - 3. With Māgha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.03. 3. Māghasutta  - 3. With Māgha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māgho devaputto abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the glorious god Māgha, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho māgho devaputto bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃsu chetvā sukhaṃ seti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When what is incinerated do you sleep at ease? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kiṃsu chetvā na socati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When what is incinerated is there no sorrow? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kissassu ekadhammassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the one thing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vadhaṃ rocesi gotamā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose killing you approve?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kodhaṃ chetvā sukhaṃ seti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When anger’s incinerated you sleep at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodhaṃ chetvā na socati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When anger’s incinerated there is no sorrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhassa visamūlassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Vatrabhū, anger has a poisoned root, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">madhuraggassa vatrabhū; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a honey tip. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vadhaṃ ariyā pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble ones praise the slaying of anger, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tañhi chetvā na socatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for when it’s incinerated there is no sorrow.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
