<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.30-30. Nānātitthiyasāvakasutta  - 30. The Disciples of Various Sectarians </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.30. 30. Nānātitthiyasāvakasutta  - 30. The Disciples of Various Sectarians </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Nānātitthiyavagga  - 3. Various Sectarians </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā nānātitthiyasāvakā devaputtā asamo ca sahali ca nīko ca ākoṭako ca vegabbhari ca māṇavagāmiyo ca abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ veḷuvanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, several glorious gods lit up the entire Bamboo Grove. They were Asama, Sahalī, Niṅka, Ākoṭaka, Vetambarī, and Māṇavagāmiya, and all of them were disciples of various sectarian teachers. They went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho asamo devaputto pūraṇaṃ kassapaṃ ārabbha bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Standing to one side, the god Asama recited this verse about Pūraṇa Kassapa in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha chinditamārite, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In injuring and killing here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatajānīsu kassapo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in beating and extortion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na pāpaṃ samanupassati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Kassapa saw no evil, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññaṃ vā pana attano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor any merit for oneself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve vissāsamācikkhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What he taught should truly be trusted, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthā arahati mānanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’s worthy of esteem as Teacher.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sahali devaputto makkhaliṃ gosālaṃ ārabbha bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the god Sahalī recited this verse about Makkhali Gosala in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tapojigucchāya susaṃvutatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Through mortification in disgust of sin he became well restrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vācaṃ pahāya kalahaṃ janena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gave up arguing with people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samosavajjā virato saccavādī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Refraining from false speech, he spoke the truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi nūna tādisaṃ karoti pāpan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Surely such a man does no wrong!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho nīko devaputto nigaṇṭhaṃ nāṭaputtaṃ ārabbha bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the god Niṅka recited this verse about Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jegucchī nipako bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Disgusted at sin, an alert mendicant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cātuyāmasusaṃvuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">well restrained in the four controls; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhaṃ sutañca ācikkhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">explaining what is seen and heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi nūna kibbisī siyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">surely he can be no sinner!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho ākoṭako devaputto nānātitthiye ārabbha bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the god Ākoṭaka recited this verse about various sectarian teachers in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pakudhako kātiyāno nigaṇṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Pakudhaka, Kātiyāna, and Nigaṇṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye cāpime makkhalipūraṇāse; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as well as this Makkhali and Pūraṇa: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇassa satthāro sāmaññappattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Teachers of communities, attained ascetics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi nūna te sappurisehi dūre”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">surely they weren’t far from truly good men!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vegabbhari devaputto ākoṭakaṃ devaputtaṃ gāthāya paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the god Vetambarī replied to the god Ākoṭaka in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sahācaritena chavo sigālo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Though the wretched jackal howls along, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kotthuko sīhasamo kadāci; </span></p>
<p class="p3">it never equals the lion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggo musāvādī gaṇassa satthā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A naked liar with suspicious conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkassarācāro na sataṃ sarikkho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">though they teach a community, doesn’t resemble the good.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā begabbhariṃ devaputtaṃ anvāvisitvā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked took possession of the god Vetambarī and recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tapojigucchāya āyuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Those dedicated to mortification in disgust of sin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pālayaṃ pavivekiyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">safeguarding their seclusion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpe ca ye niviṭṭhāse, </span></p>
<p class="p3">attached to form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devalokābhinandino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they rejoice in the heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ve sammānusāsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Indeed, those mortals give correct instructions </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paralokāya mātiyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">regarding the next world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā, māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāya paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye keci rūpā idha vā huraṃ vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whatever forms there are in this world or the world beyond, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye cantalikkhasmiṃ pabhāsavaṇṇā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and those of shining beauty in the sky, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbeva te te namucippasatthā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">all of these you praise, Namuci, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisaṃva macchānaṃ vadhāya khittā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like bait tossed out for catching fish.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māṇavagāmiyo devaputto bhagavantaṃ ārabbha bhagavato santike imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the god Māṇavagāmiya recited this verse about the Buddha in his presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vipulo rājagahīyānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Of all the mountains of Rājagaha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">giri seṭṭho pavuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Vipulo’s said to be the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seto himavataṃ seṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seta is the best of the Himalayan peaks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādicco aghagāminaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the sun, of travelers in space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuddo udadhinaṃ seṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ocean is the best of seas, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nakkhattānaṃva candimā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the moon, of lights that shine at night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadevakassa lokassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But in all the world with its gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho aggo pavuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddha is declared foremost.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānātitthiyavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sivo khemo ca serī ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ghaṭī jantu ca rohito; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nando nandivisālo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susimo nānātitthiyena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devaputtasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on Gods are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
