<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.07-7. Aḍḍakaraṇasutta  - 7. Judgment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.07. 7. Aḍḍakaraṇasutta  - 7. Judgment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Shackles </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, King Pasenadi said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idhāhaṃ, bhante, aḍḍakaraṇe nisinno passāmi khattiyamahāsālepi brāhmaṇamahāsālepi gahapatimahāsālepi aḍḍhe mahaddhane mahābhoge pahūtajātarūparajate pahūtavittūpakaraṇe pahūtadhanadhaññe kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ sampajānamusā bhāsante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, when I’m sitting in judgment I see well-to-do aristocrats, brahmins, and householders—rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property and assets, and lots of money and grain. But they tell deliberate lies for the sake of sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘alaṃ dāni me aḍḍakaraṇena, bhadramukho dāni aḍḍakaraṇena paññāyissatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Enough with passing judgment today. Now my dear will be known by the judgments he makes.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, mahārāja, evametaṃ, mahārāja. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, great king! That’s so true! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, mahārāja, khattiyamahāsālā brāhmaṇamahāsālā gahapatimahāsālā aḍḍhā mahaddhanā mahābhogā pahūtajātarūparajatā pahūtavittūpakaraṇā pahūtadhanadhaññā kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ sampajānamusā bhāsanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who are well-to-do aristocrats, brahmins, and householders tell deliberate lies for the sake of sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṃ taṃ bhavissati dīgharattaṃ ahitāya dukkhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is for their lasting harm and suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sārattā kāmabhogesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Full of desire for possessions and pleasures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">giddhā kāmesu mucchitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">greedy, infatuated by sensual pleasures; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atisāraṃ na bujjhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t notice that they’ve gone too far, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">macchā khippaṃva oḍḍitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like fish entering a net set out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchāsaṃ kaṭukaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’ll be bitter later on; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vipāko hissa pāpako”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the result will be bad for them.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
