<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.25-25. Pabbatūpamasutta  - 25. The Simile of the Mountain </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.25. 25. Pabbatūpamasutta  - 25. The Simile of the Mountain </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyavagga  - 3. Kosala </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">King Pasenadi of Kosala sat to one side, and the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handa kuto nu tvaṃ, mahārāja, āgacchasi divā divassā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, great king, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni tāni, bhante, raññaṃ khattiyānaṃ muddhāvasittānaṃ issariyamadamattānaṃ kāmagedhapariyuṭṭhitānaṃ janapadatthāvariyappattānaṃ mahantaṃ pathavimaṇḍalaṃ abhivijiya ajjhāvasantānaṃ rājakaraṇīyāni bhavanti, tesu khvāhaṃ, etarahi ussukkamāpanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, there are anointed aristocratic kings who are infatuated with authority, and obsessed with greed for sensual pleasures. They have attained stability in the country, occupying a vast conquered territory. Today I have been busy fulfilling the duties of such kings.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, mahārāja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, great king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idha te puriso āgaccheyya puratthimāya disāya saddhāyiko paccayiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a trustworthy and reliable man were to come from the east. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’d approach you and say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yagghe, mahārāja, jāneyyāsi, ahaṃ āgacchāmi puratthimāya disāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please sir, you should know this. I come from the east. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthaddasaṃ mahantaṃ pabbataṃ abbhasamaṃ, sabbe pāṇe nippothento āgacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There I saw a huge mountain that reached the clouds. And it was coming this way, crushing all creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ te, mahārāja, karaṇīyaṃ, taṃ karohī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So then, great king, do what you must!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha dutiyo puriso āgaccheyya pacchimāya disāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a second trustworthy and reliable man were to come from the west … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha tatiyo puriso āgaccheyya uttarāya disāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a third from the north … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha catuttho puriso āgaccheyya dakkhiṇāya disāya saddhāyiko paccayiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a fourth from the south. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’d approach you and say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yagghe, mahārāja, jāneyyāsi, ahaṃ āgacchāmi dakkhiṇāya disāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please sir, you should know this. I come from the south. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthaddasaṃ mahantaṃ pabbataṃ abbhasamaṃ sabbe pāṇe nippothento āgacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There I saw a huge mountain that reached the clouds. And it was coming this way, crushing all creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ te, mahārāja, karaṇīyaṃ taṃ karohī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So then, great king, do what you must!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpe te, mahārāja, mahati mahabbhaye samuppanne dāruṇe manussakkhaye dullabhe manussatte kimassa karaṇīyan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Should such a dire threat arise—a terrible loss of human life, when human birth is so rare—what would you do?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evarūpe me, bhante, mahati mahabbhaye samuppanne dāruṇe manussakkhaye dullabhe manussatte kimassa karaṇīyaṃ aññatra dhammacariyāya aññatra samacariyāya aññatra kusalakiriyāya aññatra puññakiriyāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what could I do but practice the teachings, practice morality, doing skillful and good actions?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ārocemi kho te, mahārāja, paṭivedemi kho te, mahārāja, adhivattati kho taṃ, mahārāja, jarāmaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I tell you, great king, I announce to you: old age and death are advancing upon you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivattamāne ce te, mahārāja, jarāmaraṇe kimassa karaṇīyan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since old age and death are advancing upon you, what would you do?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Adhivattamāne ca me, bhante, jarāmaraṇe kimassa karaṇīyaṃ aññatra dhammacariyāya samacariyāya kusalakiriyāya puññakiriyāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what can I do but practice the teachings, practice morality, doing skillful and good actions? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni tāni, bhante, raññaṃ khattiyānaṃ muddhāvasittānaṃ issariyamadamattānaṃ kāmagedhapariyuṭṭhitānaṃ janapadatthāvariyappattānaṃ mahantaṃ pathavimaṇḍalaṃ abhivijiya ajjhāvasantānaṃ hatthiyuddhāni bhavanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, there are anointed aristocratic kings who are infatuated with authority, and obsessed with greed for sensual pleasures. They have attained stability in the country, occupying a vast conquered territory. Such kings engage in battles of elephants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesampi, bhante, hatthiyuddhānaṃ natthi gati natthi visayo adhivattamāne jarāmaraṇe. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yānipi tāni, bhante, raññaṃ khattiyānaṃ muddhāvasittānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhāvasantānaṃ assayuddhāni bhavanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">cavalry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rathayuddhāni bhavanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">chariots, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pattiyuddhāni bhavanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or infantry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesampi, bhante, pattiyuddhānaṃ natthi gati natthi visayo adhivattamāne jarāmaraṇe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there is no place, no scope for such battles when old age and death are advancing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi kho pana, bhante, imasmiṃ rājakule mantino mahāmattā, ye pahonti āgate paccatthike mantehi bhedayituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this royal court there are ministers of wise counsel who are capable of dividing an approaching enemy by wise counsel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesampi, bhante, mantayuddhānaṃ natthi gati natthi visayo adhivattamāne jarāmaraṇe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there is no place, no scope for such diplomatic battles when old age and death are advancing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃvijjati kho pana, bhante, imasmiṃ rājakule pahūtaṃ hiraññasuvaṇṇaṃ bhūmigatañceva vehāsaṭṭhañca, yena mayaṃ pahoma āgate paccatthike dhanena upalāpetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this royal court there is abundant gold coin and bullion stored in dungeons and towers. Using this wealth we can pay off an approaching enemy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesampi, bhante, dhanayuddhānaṃ natthi gati natthi visayo adhivattamāne jarāmaraṇe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there is no place, no scope for such monetary battles when old age and death are advancing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivattamāne ca me, bhante, jarāmaraṇe kimassa karaṇīyaṃ aññatra dhammacariyāya samacariyāya kusalakiriyāya puññakiriyāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When old age and death are advancing, what can I do but practice the teachings, practice morality, doing skillful and good actions?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, mahārāja, evametaṃ, mahārāja. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, great king! That’s so true! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivattamāne jarāmaraṇe kimassa karaṇīyaṃ aññatra dhammacariyāya samacariyāya kusalakiriyāya puññakiriyāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When old age and death are advancing, what can you do but practice the teachings, practice morality, doing skillful and good actions?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathāpi selā vipulā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suppose there were vast mountains </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nabhaṃ āhacca pabbatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of solid rock touching the sky </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samantānupariyāyeyyuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">drawing in from all sides </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nippothento catuddisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and crushing the four quarters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ jarā ca maccu ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So too old age and death </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhivattanti pāṇine; </span></p>
<p class="p3">advance upon all living creatures—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khattiye brāhmaṇe vesse, </span></p>
<p class="p3">aristocrats, brahmins, merchants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sudde caṇḍālapukkuse; </span></p>
<p class="p3">workers, outcastes, and scavengers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kiñci parivajjeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They spare nothing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbamevābhimaddati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They crush all beneath them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tattha hatthīnaṃ bhūmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s nowhere for elephants to take a stand, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na rathānaṃ na pattiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor chariots nor infantry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāpi mantayuddhena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They can’t be defeated </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkā jetuṃ dhanena vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by diplomatic battles or by wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi paṇḍito poso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why an astute person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sampassaṃ atthamattano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing what’s good for themselves, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddhe dhamme ca saṅghe ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">being wise, would place faith </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhīro saddhaṃ nivesaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dhammaṃ cari kāyena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever lives by the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vācāya uda cetasā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in body, speech, and mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idheva naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is praised in this life </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pecca sagge pamodatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and departs to rejoice in heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyo vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalo ayyikā loko, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">issattaṃ pabbatūpamā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Desitaṃ buddhaseṭṭhena, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imaṃ kosalapañcakanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosalasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses with the Kosalan are completed.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
