<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.01-1. Daharasutta  - 1. Young </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.01. 1. Daharasutta  - 1. Young </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Shackles </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhavampi no gotamo anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddhoti paṭijānātī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Does Master Gotama claim to have awakened to the supreme perfect awakening?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yañhi taṃ, mahārāja, sammā vadamāno vadeyya ‘anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho’ti, mameva taṃ sammā vadamāno vadeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If anyone should rightly be said to have awakened to the supreme perfect awakening, it’s me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, mahārāja, anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For, great king, I have awakened to the supreme perfect awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yepi te, bho gotama, samaṇabrāhmaṇā saṅghino gaṇino gaṇācariyā ñātā yasassino titthakarā sādhusammatā bahujanassa, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, there are those ascetics and brahmins who lead an order and a community, and teach a community. They’re well-known and famous religious founders, regarded as holy by many people. That is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pūraṇo kassapo, makkhali gosālo, nigaṇṭho nāṭaputto, sañcayo belaṭṭhaputto, pakudho kaccāyano, ajito kesakambalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pūraṇa Kassapa, Makkhali Gosāla, Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta, Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta, Pakudha Kaccāyana, and Ajita Kesakambala. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tepi mayā ‘anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddhoti paṭijānāthā’ti puṭṭhā samānā anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddhoti na paṭijānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I also asked them whether they claimed to have awakened to the supreme perfect awakening, but they made no such claim. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ pana bhavaṃ gotamo daharo ceva jātiyā navo ca pabbajjāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">So why do you, given that you’re so young in age and newly gone forth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattāro kho me, mahārāja, daharāti na uññātabbā, daharāti na paribhotabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, these four things should not be looked down on or disparaged because they are young. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khattiyo kho, mahārāja, daharoti na uññātabbo, daharoti na paribhotabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An aristocrat, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Urago kho, mahārāja, daharoti na uññātabbo, daharoti na paribhotabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a snake, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggi kho, mahārāja, daharoti na uññātabbo, daharoti na paribhotabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a fire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu, kho, mahārāja, daharoti na uññātabbo, daharoti na paribhotabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a mendicant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, mahārāja, cattāro daharāti na uññātabbā, daharāti na paribhotabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four things should not be looked down on or disparaged because they are young.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khattiyaṃ jātisampannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A man should not despise </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhijātaṃ yasassinaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">an aristocrat of impeccable lineage, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharoti nāvajāneyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">high-born and famous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na naṃ paribhave naro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">just because they’re young. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañhi so manujindo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For it’s possible that that lord of men, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rajjaṃ laddhāna khattiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as aristocrat, will gain the throne. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kuddho rājadaṇḍena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And in his anger he’ll execute a royal punishment, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ pakkamate bhusaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and have you violently beaten. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā taṃ parivajjeyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hence you should avoid him </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rakkhaṃ jīvitamattano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the sake of your own life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāme vā yadi vā raññe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether in village or wilderness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha passe bhujaṅgamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever a serpent is seen, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharoti nāvajāneyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a man should not look down on it </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na naṃ paribhave naro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or despise it for its youth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uccāvacehi vaṇṇehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With its rainbow of colors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">urago carati tejasī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the snake of fiery breath glides along. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So āsajja ḍaṃse bālaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It lashes out and bites the fool, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">naraṃ nāriñca ekadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">both men and women alike. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā taṃ parivajjeyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hence you should avoid it </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rakkhaṃ jīvitamattano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the sake of your own life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahūtabhakkhaṃ jālinaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fire devours a huge amount, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāvakaṃ kaṇhavattaniṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a conflagration with a blackened trail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharoti nāvajāneyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man should not look down on it </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na naṃ paribhave naro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">just because it’s young. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Laddhā hi so upādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For once it gets fuel </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahā hutvāna pāvako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’ll become a huge conflagration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So āsajja ḍahe bālaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’ll lash out and burn the fool, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">naraṃ nāriñca ekadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">both men and women alike. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā taṃ parivajjeyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hence you should avoid it </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rakkhaṃ jīvitamattano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the sake of your own life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vanaṃ yadaggi ḍahati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a forest is burned by fire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāvako kaṇhavattanī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a conflagration with a blackened trail, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jāyanti tattha pārohā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the shoots will spring up there again, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahorattānamaccaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the passing of the days and nights. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañca kho sīlasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if a mendicant endowed with ethics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu ḍahati tejasā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">burns you with their power, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tassa puttā pasavo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll have no sons or cattle, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāyādā vindare dhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor will your heirs find wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anapaccā adāyādā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Childless and heirless you become, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tālāvatthū bhavanti te. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a palm-tree stump. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi paṇḍito poso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why an astute person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sampassaṃ atthamattano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing what’s good for themselves, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhujaṅgamaṃ pāvakañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">would always treat these properly: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khattiyañca yasassinaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a snake, a conflagration, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuñca sīlasampannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a famous aristocrat, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammadeva samācare”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a mendicant endowed with ethics.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, rājā pasenadi kosalo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bhante, abhikkantaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, sir! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhagavatā anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṃghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakaṃ maṃ, bhante, bhagavā dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
