<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.16-16. Mallikāsutta  - 16. A Daughter </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.16. 16. Mallikāsutta  - 16. A Daughter </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Childless </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro puriso yena rājā pasenadi kosalo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā rañño pasenadissa kosalassa upakaṇṇake ārocesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a man went up to the king and whispered in his ear, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mallikā, deva, devī dhītaraṃ vijātā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your Majesty, Queen Mallikā has given birth to a daughter.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, rājā pasenadi kosalo anattamano ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, King Pasenadi was disappointed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ anattamanataṃ viditvā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing that King Pasenadi was disappointed, on that occasion the Buddha recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Itthīpi hi ekacciyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, some women are better than men, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyā posa janādhipa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">O ruler of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Medhāvinī sīlavatī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wise and virtuous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sassudevā patibbatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a devoted wife who honors her mother in law. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā yo jāyati poso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when she has a son, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sūro hoti disampati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he becomes a hero, O lord of the land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tādisā subhagiyā putto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The son of such a blessed lady </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rajjampi anusāsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">may even rule the realm.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
