<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.03-3. Jarāmaraṇasutta  - 3. Old Age and Death </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.03. 3. Jarāmaraṇasutta  - 3. Old Age and Death </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Shackles </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, King Pasenadi said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthi nu kho, bhante, jātassa aññatra jarāmaraṇā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, for someone who has been reborn, is there anything apart from old age and death?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthi kho, mahārāja, jātassa aññatra jarāmaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, for someone who has been reborn, there’s nothing apart from old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, mahārāja, khattiyamahāsālā aḍḍhā mahaddhanā mahābhogā pahūtajātarūparajatā pahūtavittūpakaraṇā pahūtadhanadhaññā, tesampi jātānaṃ natthi aññatra jarāmaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even for well-to-do aristocrats, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, mahārāja, brāhmaṇamahāsālā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">brahmins, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gahapatimahāsālā aḍḍhā mahaddhanā mahābhogā pahūtajātarūparajatā pahūtavittūpakaraṇā pahūtadhanadhaññā, tesampi jātānaṃ natthi aññatra jarāmaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or householders—rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property and assets, and lots of money and grain—when they’re born, there’s nothing apart from old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, mahārāja, bhikkhū arahanto khīṇāsavā vusitavanto katakaraṇīyā ohitabhārā anuppattasadatthā parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojanā sammadaññāvimuttā, tesampāyaṃ kāyo bhedanadhammo nikkhepanadhammo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even for mendicants who are perfected—who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and are rightly freed through enlightenment—their bodies are liable to break up and be laid to rest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jīranti ve rājarathā sucittā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The fancy chariots of kings wear out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho sarīrampi jaraṃ upeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and this body too gets old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satañca dhammo na jaraṃ upeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But goodness never gets old: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santo have sabbhi pavedayantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so the true and good proclaim.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
