<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.06-6. Appakasutta  - 6. Few </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.06. 6. Appakasutta  - 6. Few </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Shackles </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, King Pasenadi said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha mayhaṃ, bhante, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just now, sir, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘appakā te sattā lokasmiṃ ye uḷāre uḷāre bhoge labhitvā na ceva majjanti, na ca pamajjanti, na ca kāmesu gedhaṃ āpajjanti, na ca sattesu vippaṭipajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Few are the sentient beings in the world who, when they obtain luxury possessions, don’t get indulgent and negligent, giving in to greed for sensual pleasures, and doing the wrong thing by others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho eteva bahutarā sattā lokasmiṃ ye uḷāre uḷāre bhoge labhitvā majjanti ceva pamajjanti, ca kāmesu ca gedhaṃ āpajjanti, sattesu ca vippaṭipajjantī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are many more who, when they obtain luxury possessions, do get indulgent and negligent, giving in to greed for sensual pleasures, and doing the wrong thing by others.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, mahārāja, evametaṃ, mahārāja. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, great king! That’s so true!” said the Buddha. And he repeated the king’s statement, adding: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appakā te, mahārāja, sattā lokasmiṃ, ye uḷāre uḷāre bhoge labhitvā na ceva majjanti, na ca pamajjanti, na ca kāmesu gedhaṃ āpajjanti, na ca sattesu vippaṭipajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho eteva bahutarā sattā lokasmiṃ, ye uḷāre uḷāre bhoge labhitvā majjanti ceva pamajjanti ca kāmesu ca gedhaṃ āpajjanti, sattesu ca vippaṭipajjantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sārattā kāmabhogesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Full of desire for possessions and pleasures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">giddhā kāmesu mucchitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">greedy, infatuated by sensual pleasures; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atisāraṃ na bujjhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t notice that they’ve gone too far, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">migā kūṭaṃva oḍḍitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like deer falling into a trap set out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchāsaṃ kaṭukaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’ll be bitter later on; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vipāko hissa pāpako”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the result will be bad for them.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
