<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.17-17. Appamādasutta  - 17. Diligence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.17. 17. Appamādasutta  - 17. Diligence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Childless </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, King Pasenadi said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthi nu kho, bhante, eko dhammo yo ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, is there one thing that secures benefits for both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ samparāyikañcā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">the present life and lives to come?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi kho, mahārāja, eko dhammo yo ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, great king.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ samparāyikañcā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo pana, bhante, eko dhammo, yo ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“So what is it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ samparāyikañcā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appamādo kho, mahārāja, eko dhammo, yo ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Diligence, great king, is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, secures benefits for both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ samparāyikañcāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the present life and lives to come. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, mahārāja, yāni kānici jaṅgalānaṃ pāṇānaṃ padajātāni, sabbāni tāni hatthipade samodhānaṃ gacchanti, hatthipadaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati—yadidaṃ mahantattena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant’s footprint. So an elephant’s footprint is said to be the biggest of them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, mahārāja, appamādo eko dhammo, yo ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, diligence is one thing that secures benefits for both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ samparāyikañcā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the present life and lives to come.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āyuṃ arogiyaṃ vaṇṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“For one who desires a continuous flow </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saggaṃ uccākulīnataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of exceptional delights—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratiyo patthayantena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">long life, beauty, and health, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uḷārā aparāparā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">heaven, and birth in an eminent family—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamādaṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the astute praise diligence </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puññakiriyāsu paṇḍitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in making merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamatto ubho atthe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being diligent, an astute person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhiggaṇhāti paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">secures both benefits: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhe dhamme ca yo attho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the benefit in this life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo cattho samparāyiko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and in lives to come. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthābhisamayā dhīro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wise one, comprehending the meaning, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇḍitoti pavuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called ‘astute’.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
