<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.24-24. Issattasutta  - 24. Archery </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.24. 24. Issattasutta  - 24. Archery </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyavagga  - 3. Kosala </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, King Pasenadi said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kattha nu kho, bhante, dānaṃ dātabban”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, where should a gift be given?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yattha kho, mahārāja, cittaṃ pasīdatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wherever your heart feels inspired, great king.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kattha pana, bhante, dinnaṃ mahapphalan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, where is a gift very fruitful?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññaṃ kho etaṃ, mahārāja, kattha dānaṃ dātabbaṃ, aññaṃ panetaṃ kattha dinnaṃ mahapphalanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Where a gift should be given is one thing, great king, but where a gift is very fruitful is another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavato kho, mahārāja, dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ, no tathā dussīle. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A gift is very fruitful when it’s given to an ethical person, not so much to an unethical person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena hi, mahārāja, taññevettha paṭipucchissāmi. Yathā, te khameyya, tathā naṃ byākareyyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well then, great king, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, mahārāja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, great king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idha tyassa yuddhaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ saṅgāmo samupabyūḷho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose you were at war, ready to fight a battle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha āgaccheyya khattiyakumāro asikkhito akatahattho akatayoggo akatūpāsano bhīru chambhī utrāsī palāyī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then along comes an aristocrat youth who is untrained, inexpert, unfit, inexperienced. And he’s fearful, cowardly, trembling, quick to flee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhareyyāsi taṃ purisaṃ, attho ca te tādisena purisenā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Would you employ such a man? Would he be of any use to you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhante, bhareyyaṃ taṃ purisaṃ, na ca me attho tādisena purisenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir, I would have no use for such a man.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atha āgaccheyya brāhmaṇakumāro asikkhito … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What about a brahmin youth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha āgaccheyya vessakumāro asikkhito … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a merchant youth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha āgaccheyya suddakumāro asikkhito … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">or a worker youth who was similar?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca me attho tādisena purisenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir, I would have no use for such a man.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, mahārāja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, great king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idha tyassa yuddhaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ saṅgāmo samupabyūḷho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose you were at war, ready to fight a battle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha āgaccheyya khattiyakumāro susikkhito katahattho katayoggo katūpāsano abhīru acchambhī anutrāsī apalāyī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then along comes an aristocrat youth who is trained, expert, fit, experienced. And he’s fearless, brave, bold, standing his ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhareyyāsi taṃ purisaṃ, attho ca te tādisena purisenā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Would you employ such a man? Would he be of any use to you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhareyyāhaṃ, bhante, taṃ purisaṃ, attho ca me tādisena purisenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir, I would have a use for such a man.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atha āgaccheyya brāhmaṇakumāro … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What about a brahmin youth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha āgaccheyya vessakumāro … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a merchant youth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha āgaccheyya suddakumāro susikkhito katahattho katayoggo katūpāsano abhīru acchambhī anutrāsī apalāyī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or a worker youth who was similar? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhareyyāsi taṃ purisaṃ, attho ca te tādisena purisenā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Would you employ such a man? Would he be of any use to you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhareyyāhaṃ, bhante, taṃ purisaṃ, attho ca me tādisena purisenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir, I would have a use for such a man.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, mahārāja, yasmā kasmā cepi kulā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito hoti, so ca hoti pañcaṅgavippahīno pañcaṅgasamannāgato, tasmiṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, a gift to anyone who has given up five factors and possesses five factors is very fruitful, no matter what family they’ve gone forth from. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañcaṅgāni pahīnāni honti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five factors they’ve given up? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmacchando pahīno hoti, byāpādo pahīno hoti, thinamiddhaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, uddhaccakukkuccaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, vicikicchā pahīnā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni pañcaṅgāni pahīnāni honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five factors they’ve given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahaṅgehi samannāgato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five factors they possess? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asekkhena sīlakkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekkhena samādhikkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekkhena paññākkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekkhena vimuttikkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekkhena vimuttiñāṇadassanakkhandhena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The entire spectrum of an adept’s ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi pañcahaṅgehi samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five factors they possess. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti pañcaṅgavippahīne pañcaṅgasamannāgate dinnaṃ mahapphalan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that a gift to anyone who has given up these five factors and possesses these five factors is very fruitful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Issattaṃ balavīriyañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Any youth skilled at archery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yasmiṃ vijjetha māṇave; </span></p>
<p class="p3">powerful and vigorous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ yuddhattho bhare rājā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">would be employed by a king going to war—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāsūraṃ jātipaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one is not a coward because of one’s birth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatheva khantisoraccaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just so, whoever is settled </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammā yasmiṃ patiṭṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the qualities of patience and gentleness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyavuttiṃ medhāviṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a clever person with noble conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hīnajaccampi pūjaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">should be venerated even if they’re low born. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāraye assame ramme, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should build lovely hermitages </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsayettha bahussute; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and settle learned people in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Papañca vivane kayirā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should set up water supplies in barren regions </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dugge saṅkamanāni ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and passages in places hard to travel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Annaṃ pānaṃ khādanīyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Food, drink, edibles, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vatthasenāsanāni ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">clothes, and lodgings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadeyya ujubhūtesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">should be given to the upright ones, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vippasannena cetasā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with a clear and confident heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā hi megho thanayaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The thundering rain cloud, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vijjumālī satakkaku; </span></p>
<p class="p3">its hundred peaks wreathed in lightning, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thalaṃ ninnañca pūreti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">pours down over the rich earth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhivassaṃ vasundharaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">soaking the uplands and valleys. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatheva saddho sutavā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So too an astute person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhisaṅkhacca bhojanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">faithful and learned, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vanibbake tappayati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">should prepare a meal to satisfy </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">annapānena paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">renunciates with food and drink. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmodamāno pakireti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rejoicing, they distribute, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">detha dethāti bhāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">saying, ‘Give! give!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ hissa gajjitaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For that is their thunder, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devasseva pavassato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the gods when it rains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā puññadhārā vipulā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That stream of merit so abundant </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dātāraṃ abhivassatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">showers down on the giver.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
