<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.20-20. Rajjasutta  - 20. Ruling </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.20. 20. Rajjasutta  - 20. Ruling </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Rule </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu viharati himavantapadese araññakuṭikāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans, in a wilderness hut on the slopes of the Himalayas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sakkā nu kho rajjaṃ kāretuṃ ahanaṃ aghātayaṃ ajinaṃ ajāpayaṃ asocaṃ asocāpayaṃ dhammenā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wonder if it’s possible to rule legitimately, without killing or having someone kill for you; without conquering or having someone conquer for you; without sorrowing or causing sorrow?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā bhagavato cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Māra the Wicked, knowing what the Buddha was thinking, went up to him and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kāretu, bhante, bhagavā rajjaṃ, kāretu, sugato, rajjaṃ ahanaṃ aghātayaṃ ajinaṃ ajāpayaṃ asocaṃ asocāpayaṃ dhammenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rule, Blessed One! Rule, Holy One! Rule legitimately, without killing or having someone kill for you; without conquering or having someone conquer for you; without sorrowing or causing sorrow!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana me tvaṃ, pāpima, passasi yaṃ maṃ tvaṃ evaṃ vadesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what do you see, Wicked One, that you say this to me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kāretu, bhante, bhagavā rajjaṃ, kāretu sugato, rajjaṃ ahanaṃ aghātayaṃ ajinaṃ ajāpayaṃ asocaṃ asocāpayaṃ dhammenā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavatā kho, bhante, cattāro iddhipādā bhāvitā bahulīkatā yānīkatā vatthukatā anuṭṭhitā paricitā susamāraddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Blessed One, sir, has developed and cultivated the four bases for psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkhamāno ca, bhante, bhagavā himavantaṃ pabbatarājaṃ suvaṇṇaṃ tveva adhimucceyya suvaṇṇañca panassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he wished, the Blessed One need only determine that the Himalaya, king of mountains, was gold, and it would turn into gold.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pabbatassa suvaṇṇassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Take a golden mountain, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātarūpassa kevalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">made entirely of gold, and double it—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvittāva nālamekassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s still not enough for one! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vidvā samañcare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing this, live a moral life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dukkhamaddakkhi yatonidānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person has seen where suffering comes from </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmesu so jantu kathaṃ nameyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">how could they incline towards sensual pleasures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upadhiṃ viditvā saṅgoti loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Realizing that attachment is a tie in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva jantu vinayāya sikkhe”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a person would train to remove it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyo vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāsāṇo sīho sakalikaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpañca mānasaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattaṃ āyatanaṃ piṇḍaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassakaṃ rajjena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
