<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.18-18. Piṇḍasutta  - 18. Alms Food </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.18. 18. Piṇḍasutta  - 18. Alms Food </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Rule </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā magadhesu viharati pañcasālāyaṃ brāhmaṇagāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Magadhans near the brahmin village of Pañcasālā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena pañcasālāyaṃ brāhmaṇagāme kumārikānaṃ pāhunakāni bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time in Pañcasālā the young women were taking care of guests. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya pañcasālaṃ brāhmaṇagāmaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Pañcasālā for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena pañcasāleyyakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā mārena pāpimatā anvāviṭṭhā bhavanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Māra had possessed the brahmins and householders of Pañcasālā, so that they thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mā samaṇo gotamo piṇḍamalatthā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t let the ascetic Gotama get any alms!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā yathādhotena pattena pañcasālaṃ brāhmaṇagāmaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi tathādhotena pattena paṭikkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha left the village with his bowl as clean-washed as it was when he entered for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“api tvaṃ, samaṇa, piṇḍamalatthā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, ascetic, did you get any alms?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathā nu tvaṃ, pāpima, akāsi yathāhaṃ piṇḍaṃ na labheyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wicked One, did you make sure I didn’t get any alms?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhante, bhagavā dutiyampi pañcasālaṃ brāhmaṇagāmaṃ piṇḍāya pavisatu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, sir, let the Buddha enter Pañcasālā a second time for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāhaṃ karissāmi yathā bhagavā piṇḍaṃ lacchatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll make sure you get alms.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Apuññaṃ pasavi māro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Māra’s made bad karma </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsajja naṃ tathāgataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in attacking the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ nu maññasi pāpima, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wicked One, do you imagine that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me pāpaṃ vipaccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">your wickedness won’t bear fruit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susukhaṃ vata jīvāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We who have nothing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yesaṃ no natthi kiñcanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">live so very happily. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pītibhakkhā bhavissāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We’ll feed on rapture, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devā ābhassarā yathā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the gods of streaming radiance.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
