<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.04-4. Paṭhamamārapāsasutta  - 4. Māra’s Snares (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.04. 4. Paṭhamamārapāsasutta  - 4. Māra’s Snares (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Life Span </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bārāṇasiyaṃ viharati isipatane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayhaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yoniso manasikārā yoniso sammappadhānā anuttarā vimutti anuppattā, anuttarā vimutti sacchikatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I have attained and realized supreme freedom through proper attention and proper effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhepi, bhikkhave, yoniso manasikārā yoniso sammappadhānā anuttaraṃ vimuttiṃ anupāpuṇātha, anuttaraṃ vimuttiṃ sacchikarothā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You too should attain and realize supreme freedom through proper attention and proper effort.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Baddhosi mārapāsena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re bound by Māra’s snares, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye dibbā ye ca mānusā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">both human and divine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mārabandhanabaddhosi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re bound by Māra’s bonds: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me samaṇa mokkhasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you won’t escape me, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Muttāhaṃ mārapāsena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m freed from Māra’s snares, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye dibbā ye ca mānusā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">both human and divine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mārabandhanamuttomhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m freed from Māra’s bonds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nihato tvamasi antakā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re beaten, terminator!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā … pe … tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra … vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
