<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.12-12. Kinnusīhasutta  - 12. Lion </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.12. 12. Kinnusīhasutta  - 12. Lion </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Rule </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā mahatiyā parisāya parivuto dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time the Buddha was teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mārassa pāpimato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho samaṇo gotamo mahatiyā parisāya parivuto dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama is teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ yena samaṇo gotamo tenupasaṅkameyyaṃ vicakkhukammāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I go and pull the wool over their eyes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kinnu sīhova nadasi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why now do you roar like a lion? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parisāyaṃ visārado; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re so self-assured in the assembly! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭimallo hi te atthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For there is someone who’ll wrestle with you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vijitāvī nu maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so why do you imagine you’re the victor?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nadanti ve mahāvīrā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The great heroes they roar, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parisāsu visāradā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">self-assured in the assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatā balappattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One, attained to power, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇā loke visattikan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">has crossed over clinging to the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
