<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.14-14. Patirūpasutta  - 14. Appropriate </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.14. 14. Patirūpasutta  - 14. Appropriate </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Rule </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu viharati ekasālāyaṃ brāhmaṇagāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans near the brahmin village of Ekasālā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā mahatiyā gihiparisāya parivuto dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time the Buddha was teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly of laypeople. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mārassa pāpimato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho samaṇo gotamo mahatiyā gihiparisāya parivuto dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama is teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly of laypeople. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ yena samaṇo gotamo tenupasaṅkameyyaṃ vicakkhukammāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I go and pull the wool over their eyes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Netaṃ tava patirūpaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s not appropriate for you </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadaññamanusāsasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to instruct others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anurodhavirodhesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As you engage in this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā sajjittho tadācaran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t get caught up in favoring and opposing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Hitānukampī sambuddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha instructs others </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadaññamanusāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">out of compassion for their welfare. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anurodhavirodhehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One is liberated </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vippamutto tathāgato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">from favoring and opposing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
