<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.24-24. Sattavassānubandhasutta  - 24. Seven Years of Following </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.24. 24. Sattavassānubandhasutta  - 24. Seven Years of Following </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyavagga  - 3. Māra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā uruvelāyaṃ viharati najjā nerañjarāya tīre ajapālanigrodhe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena māro pāpimā sattavassāni bhagavantaṃ anubandho hoti otārāpekkho otāraṃ alabhamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Māra the Wicked had been following the Buddha for seven years hoping to find a vulnerability without success. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sokāvatiṇṇo nu vanamhi jhāyasi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are you overwhelmed by sorrow that you meditate in the forest? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vittaṃ nu jīno uda patthayāno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Have you lost a fortune, or do you long for one? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āguṃ nu gāmasmimakāsi kiñci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or perhaps you’ve committed some crime in the village? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā janena na karosi sakkhiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t you get too close to people? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkhī na sampajjati kenaci te”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why does no-one get close to you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sokassa mūlaṃ palikhāya sabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve dug out the root of sorrow completely. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgu jhāyāmi asocamāno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I practice absorption free of guilt or sorrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chetvāna sabbaṃ bhavalobhajappaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve cut off all greed and hunger for future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāsavo jhāyāmi pamattabandhū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Undefiled, I practice absorption, O kinsman of the negligent!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ vadanti mama yidanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The things they call ‘mine’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye vadanti mamanti ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and those who say ‘it’s mine’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettha ce te mano atthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">if your mind remains there, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me samaṇa mokkhasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you won’t escape me, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ vadanti na taṃ mayhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The things they speak of aren’t mine; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye vadanti na te ahaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m not someone who speaks like that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ pāpima jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So know this, Wicked One: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me maggampi dakkhasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you won’t even see the path I take.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace maggaṃ anubuddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If you’ve discovered the path </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khemaṃ amatagāminaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s safe, and leads to the deathless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apehi gaccha tvameveko, </span></p>
<p class="p3">go and walk that path alone—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kimaññamanusāsasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">why teach it to anyone else?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amaccudheyyaṃ pucchanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Those crossing to the far shore </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye janā pāragāmino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">ask what’s beyond the domain of Death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesāhaṃ puṭṭho akkhāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I’m asked, I explain to them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ saccaṃ taṃ nirūpadhin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the truth without attachments.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhante, gāmassa vā nigamassa vā avidūre pokkharaṇī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, suppose there was a lotus pond not far from a town or village, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrassa kakkaṭako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a crab lived there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhante, sambahulā kumārakā vā kumārikāyo vā tamhā gāmā vā nigamā vā nikkhamitvā yena sā pokkharaṇī tenupasaṅkameyyuṃ; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ kakkaṭakaṃ udakā uddharitvā thale patiṭṭhapeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several boys or girls would leave the town or village and go to the pond, where they’d pull out the crab and put it on dry land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ yadeva hi so, bhante, kakkaṭako aḷaṃ abhininnāmeyya taṃ tadeva te kumārakā vā kumārikāyo vā kaṭṭhena vā kathalāya vā sañchindeyyuṃ sambhañjeyyuṃ sampalibhañjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whenever that crab extended a claw, those boys or girls would snap, crack, and break it off with a stick or a stone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhante, kakkaṭako sabbehi aḷehi sañchinnehi sambhaggehi sampalibhaggehi abhabbo taṃ pokkharaṇiṃ otarituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when that crab’s claws had all been snapped, cracked, and broken off it wouldn’t be able to return down into that lotus pond. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhante, yāni kānici visūkāyikāni visevitāni vipphanditāni, sabbāni tāni bhagavatā sañchinnāni sambhaggāni sampalibhaggāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, sir, the Buddha has snapped, cracked, and broken off all my tricks, dodges, and evasions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhabbo dānāhaṃ, bhante, puna bhagavantaṃ upasaṅkamituṃ yadidaṃ otārāpekkho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now I’m not able to approach the Buddha again in hopes of finding a vulnerability.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā bhagavato santike imā nibbejanīyā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked recited these verses of disappointment in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Medavaṇṇañca pāsāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A crow once circled a stone </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāyaso anupariyagā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that looked like a lump of fat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apettha muduṃ vindema, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Perhaps I’ll find something tender,’ it thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api assādanā siyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘perhaps there’s something tasty.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aladdhā tattha assādaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it didn’t find anything tasty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāyasetto apakkame; </span></p>
<p class="p3">so the crow left that place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kākova selamāsajja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Like the crow that pecked the stone, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbijjāpema gotamā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I leave Gotama disappointed.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
