<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.02-2. Hatthirājavaṇṇasutta  - 2. In the Form of an Elephant King </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.02. 2. Hatthirājavaṇṇasutta  - 2. In the Form of an Elephant King </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Life Span </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā uruvelāyaṃ viharati najjā nerañjarāya tīre ajapālanigrodhamūle paṭhamābhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time, when he was first awakened, the Buddha was staying near Uruvelā at the root of the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā rattandhakāratimisāyaṃ abbhokāse nisinno hoti, devo ca ekamekaṃ phusāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was meditating in the open during the dark of night, while a gentle rain drizzled down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā bhagavato bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo mahantaṃ hatthirājavaṇṇaṃ abhinimminitvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the Buddha feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, manifested in the form of a huge elephant king and approached him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma mahāariṭṭhako maṇi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its head was like a huge block of soapstone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamassa sīsaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma suddhaṃ rūpiyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its tusks were like pure silver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamassa dantā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma mahatī naṅgalīsā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its trunk was like a long plough pole. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamassa soṇḍo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saṃsaraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Transmigrating for such a long time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaṇṇaṃ katvā subhāsubhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve made forms beautiful and ugly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alaṃ te tena pāpima, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Enough of this, Wicked One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nihato tvamasi antakā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re beaten, terminator!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
