<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.06-6. Sappasutta  - 6. A Serpent </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.06. 6. Sappasutta  - 6. A Serpent </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Life Span </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā rattandhakāratimisāyaṃ abbhokāse nisinno hoti, devo ca ekamekaṃ phusāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was meditating in the open during the dark of night, while a gentle rain drizzled down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā bhagavato bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo mahantaṃ sapparājavaṇṇaṃ abhinimminitvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the Buddha feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, manifested in the form of a huge serpent king and approached him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma mahatī ekarukkhikā nāvā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its body was like a huge canoe carved from a single tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamassa kāyo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma mahantaṃ soṇḍikākiḷañjaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its hood was like a large brewer’s sieve. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamassa phaṇo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma mahatī kosalikā kaṃsapāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its eyes were like those big bronze dishes from Kosala. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamassa akkhīni bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma deve gaḷagaḷāyante vijjullatā niccharanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its tongue flickered from its mouth like lightning flashes in a thunderstorm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamassa mukhato jivhā niccharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma kammāragaggariyā dhamamānāya saddo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sound of its breathing was like the puffing of a blacksmith’s bellows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamassa assāsapassāsānaṃ saddo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo suññagehāni sevati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A self-controlled sage frequents </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyā so muni attasaññato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">empty buildings for lodging. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vossajja careyya tattha so, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate for such a person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpañhi tathāvidhassa taṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to live there after relinquishing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Carakā bahū bheravā bahū, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Though there are lots of creepy crawlies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho ḍaṃsasarīsapā bahū; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and lots of flies and snakes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lomampi na tattha iñjaye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they wouldn’t stir a hair </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suññāgāragato mahāmuni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of a great sage in that empty hut. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nabhaṃ phaleyya pathavī caleyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Though the sky may split and the earth may quake, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbepi pāṇā uda santaseyyuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and all creatures be stricken with fear; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sallampi ce urasi pakappayeyyuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and even if an arrow’s aimed at their breast, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upadhīsu tāṇaṃ na karonti buddhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddhas take no shelter in attachments.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
