<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.17-17. Chaphassāyatanasutta  - 17. The Six Fields of Contact </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.17. 17. Chaphassāyatanasutta  - 17. The Six Fields of Contact </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Rule </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ upādāya bhikkhūnaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk on the topic of the six fields of contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca bhikkhū aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasotā dhammaṃ suṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those mendicants were paying heed, paying attention, engaging wholeheartedly, and lending an ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mārassa pāpimato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho samaṇo gotamo channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ upādāya bhikkhūnaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sappahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This ascetic Gotama is educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk on the topic of the six fields of contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca bhikkhū aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasotā dhammaṃ suṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those mendicants are paying heed, paying attention, engaging wholeheartedly, and lending an ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ yena samaṇo gotamo tenupasaṅkameyyaṃ vicakkhukammāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I go and pull the wool over their eyes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato avidūre mahantaṃ bhayabheravaṃ saddamakāsi, apissudaṃ pathavī maññe undrīyati. Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu aññataraṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and made a terrifyingly loud noise close by him. It seemed as if the earth were shattering, so that one of the mendicants said to another, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhu bhikkhu, esā pathavī maññe undrīyatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, mendicant, it seems like the earth is shattering!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhagavā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, the Buddha said to that mendicant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nesā, bhikkhu, pathavī undrīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, that’s not the earth shattering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māro eso pāpimā tumhākaṃ vicakkhukammāya āgato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s Māra the Wicked come to pull the wool over your eyes!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpā saddā rasā gandhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sights, sounds, tastes, smells, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassā dhammā ca kevalā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches, and thoughts, the lot of them—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ lokāmisaṃ ghoraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the dreadful bait </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettha loko vimucchito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that the world’s infatuated by. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañca samatikkamma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a mindful disciple of the Buddha </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sato buddhassa sāvako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">has transcended all that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māradheyyaṃ atikkamma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having gone beyond Māra’s sovereignty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādiccova virocatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they shine like the sun.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā … pe … tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra … vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
