<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.04-4. Vijayāsutta  - 4. With Vijayā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.04. 4. Vijayāsutta  - 4. With Vijayā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhunīvagga  - 1. Nuns </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vijayā bhikkhunī pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Vijayā robed up in the morning … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle divāvihāraṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sat at the root of a tree for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā vijayāya bhikkhuniyā bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo yena vijayā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā vijayaṃ bhikkhuniṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the nun Vijayā feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make her fall away from immersion, went up to her and addressed her in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Daharā tvaṃ rūpavatī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re so young and beautiful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahañca daharo susu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I’m a youth in my prime. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcaṅgikena turiyena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Come, my lady, let us enjoy </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ehayyebhiramāmase”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the music of a five-piece band.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vijayāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Vijayā thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu khvāyaṃ manusso vā amanusso vā gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who’s speaking this verse, a human or a non-human?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vijayāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then she thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māro kho ayaṃ pāpimā mama bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is Māra the Wicked, wanting to make me feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make me fall away from immersion!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vijayā bhikkhunī “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vijayā, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpā saddā rasā gandhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sights, sounds, tastes, smells, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phoṭṭhabbā ca manoramā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and touches so delightful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niyyātayāmi tuyheva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I hand them right back to you, Māra, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māra nāhaṃ tenatthikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for I have no use for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā pūtikāyena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This body is foul, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhindanena pabhaṅgunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">decaying and fragile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭīyāmi harāyāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m horrified and repelled by it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmataṇhā samūhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I’ve eradicated sensual craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca rūpūpagā sattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are beings in the realm of luminous form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca arūpaṭṭhāyino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">others established in the formless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā ca santā samāpatti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and also those peaceful attainments: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbattha vihato tamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve destroyed the darkness regarding all of them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ vijayā bhikkhunī”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The nun Vijayā knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
