<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.01-1. Āḷavikāsutta  - 1. With Āḷavikā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.01. 1. Āḷavikāsutta  - 1. With Āḷavikā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhunīvagga  - 1. Nuns </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āḷavikā bhikkhunī pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Āḷavikā robed up in the morning and, taking her bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā yena andhavanaṃ tenupasaṅkami vivekatthinī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on her return from alms-round, she went to the Dark Forest seeking seclusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā āḷavikāya bhikkhuniyā bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo vivekamhā cāvetukāmo yena āḷavikā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āḷavikaṃ bhikkhuniṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the nun Āḷavikā feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make her fall away from seclusion, went up to her and addressed her in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthi nissaraṇaṃ loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no escape in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kiṃ vivekena kāhasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">so what will seclusion do for you? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhuñjassu kāmaratiyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Enjoy the delights of sensual pleasure; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māhu pacchānutāpinī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t regret it later.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āḷavikāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Āḷavikā thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu khvāyaṃ manusso vā amanusso vā gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who’s speaking this verse, a human or a non-human?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āḷavikāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then she thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māro kho ayaṃ pāpimā mama bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo vivekamhā cāvetukāmo gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is Māra the Wicked, wanting to make me feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make me fall away from seclusion!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āḷavikā bhikkhunī “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Āḷavikā, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi nissaraṇaṃ loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is an escape in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāya me suphussitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I’ve personally experienced it with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamattabandhu pāpima, </span></p>
<p class="p3">O Wicked One, kinsman of the negligent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na tvaṃ jānāsi taṃ padaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you don’t know that place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattisūlūpamā kāmā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual pleasures are like swords and stakes; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khandhāsaṃ adhikuṭṭanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the aggregates are their chopping block. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ tvaṃ kāmaratiṃ brūsi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What you call sensual delight </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">arati mayha sā ahū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">has become no delight for me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ āḷavikā bhikkhunī”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The nun Āḷavikā knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
