<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.02-2. Somāsutta  - 2. With Somā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.02. 2. Somāsutta  - 2. With Somā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhunīvagga  - 1. Nuns </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho somā bhikkhunī pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Somā robed up in the morning and, taking her bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā yena andhavanaṃ tenupasaṅkami divāvihārāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on her return from alms-round, she went to the Dark Forest, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhavanaṃ ajjhogāhetvā aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle divāvihāraṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">plunged deep into it, and sat at the root of a tree for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā somāya bhikkhuniyā bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo yena somā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā somaṃ bhikkhuniṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the nun Somā feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make her fall away from immersion, went up to her and addressed her in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ taṃ isīhi pattabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That state’s very challenging; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhānaṃ durabhisambhavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s for the sages to attain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na taṃ dvaṅgulapaññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not possible for a woman, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkā pappotumitthiyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with her two-fingered wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho somāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Somā thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu khvāyaṃ manusso vā amanusso vā gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who’s speaking this verse, a human or a non-human?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho somāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then she thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māro kho ayaṃ pāpimā mama bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is Māra the Wicked, wanting to make me feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make me fall away from immersion!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho somā bhikkhunī “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Somā, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Itthibhāvo kiṃ kayirā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What difference does womanhood make </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittamhi susamāhite; </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the mind is serene, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñāṇamhi vattamānamhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and knowledge is present </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammā dhammaṃ vipassato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as you rightly discern the Dhamma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna siyā evaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Surely someone who might think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthāhaṃ purisoti vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am woman’, or ‘I am man’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñci vā pana aññasmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">or ‘I am’ anything at all, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ māro vattumarahatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is fit for Māra to address.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ somā bhikkhunī”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The nun Somā knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
