<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.05-5. Uppalavaṇṇāsutta  - 5. With Uppalavaṇṇā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.05. 5. Uppalavaṇṇāsutta  - 5. With Uppalavaṇṇā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhunīvagga  - 1. Nuns </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Uppalavaṇṇā robed up in the morning … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññatarasmiṃ supupphitasālarukkhamūle aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and stood at the root of a sal tree in full flower. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā uppalavaṇṇāya bhikkhuniyā bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo yena uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā uppalavaṇṇaṃ bhikkhuniṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the nun Uppalavaṇṇā feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make her fall away from immersion, went up to her and addressed her in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Supupphitaggaṃ upagamma bhikkhuni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’ve come to this sal tree all crowned with flowers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekā tuvaṃ tiṭṭhasi sālamūle; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and stand at its root all alone, O nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na catthi te dutiyā vaṇṇadhātu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your beauty is second to none; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bāle na tvaṃ bhāyasi dhuttakānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">silly girl, aren’t you afraid of rascals?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uppalavaṇṇāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Uppalavaṇṇā thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu khvāyaṃ manusso vā amanusso vā gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who’s speaking this verse, a human or a non-human?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uppalavaṇṇāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then she thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māro kho ayaṃ pāpimā mama bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is Māra the Wicked, wanting to make me feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make me fall away from immersion!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Uppalavaṇṇā, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sataṃ sahassānipi dhuttakānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Even if 100,000 rascals like you </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāgatā tādisakā bhaveyyuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">were to come here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lomaṃ na iñjāmi na santasāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’d stir not a hair nor panic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na māra bhāyāmi tamekikāpi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m not scared of you, Māra, even alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā antaradhāyāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll vanish, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kucchiṃ vā pavisāmi te; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or I’ll enter your belly; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pakhumantarikāyampi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I could stand between your eyebrows </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṭṭhantiṃ maṃ na dakkhasi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and you still wouldn’t see me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittasmiṃ vasībhūtāmhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m the master of my own mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iddhipādā subhāvitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve developed the bases of psychic power well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbabandhanamuttāmhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m free from all bonds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na taṃ bhāyāmi āvuso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I’m not afraid of you, sir!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The nun Uppalavaṇṇā knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
