<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.04-4. Bakabrahmasutta  - 4. With Baka the Brahmā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.04. 4. Bakabrahmasutta  - 4. With Baka the Brahmā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The Appeal </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bakassa brahmuno evarūpaṃ pāpakaṃ diṭṭhigataṃ uppannaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Baka the Brahmā had the following harmful misconception: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṃ niccaṃ, idaṃ dhuvaṃ, idaṃ sassataṃ, idaṃ kevalaṃ, idaṃ acavanadhammaṃ, idañhi na jāyati na jīyati na mīyati na cavati na upapajjati, ito ca panaññaṃ uttari nissaraṇaṃ natthī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is permanent, this is everlasting, this is eternal, this is whole, this is imperishable. For this is where there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn. And there’s no other escape beyond this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bakassa brahmuno cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya—seyyathāpi nāma balavā puriso samiñjitaṃ vā bāhaṃ pasāreyya, pasāritaṃ vā bāhaṃ samiñjeyya; evameva—jetavane antarahito tasmiṃ brahmaloke pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha knew what Baka the Brahmā was thinking. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from Jeta’s Grove and reappeared in that Brahmā realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bako brahmā bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Baka the Brahmā saw the Buddha coming off in the distance </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi kho, mārisa, svāgataṃ te, mārisa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, good sir! Welcome, good sir! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cirassaṃ kho, mārisa, imaṃ pariyāyamakāsi yadidaṃ idhāgamanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idañhi, mārisa, niccaṃ, idaṃ dhuvaṃ, idaṃ sassataṃ, idaṃ kevalaṃ, idaṃ acavanadhammaṃ, idañhi na jāyati na jīyati na mīyati na cavati na upapajjati. Ito ca panaññaṃ uttari nissaraṇaṃ natthī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For this is permanent, this is everlasting, this is eternal, this is complete, this is imperishable. For this is where there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn. And there’s no other escape beyond this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhagavā bakaṃ brahmānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“avijjāgato vata bho bako brahmā, avijjāgato vata bho bako brahmā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Alas, Baka the Brahmā is lost in ignorance! Alas, Baka the Brahmā is lost in ignorance! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatra hi nāma aniccaṃyeva samānaṃ niccanti vakkhati, adhuvaṃyeva samānaṃ dhuvanti vakkhati, asassataṃyeva samānaṃ sassatanti vakkhati, akevalaṃyeva samānaṃ kevalanti vakkhati, cavanadhammaṃyeva samānaṃ acavanadhammanti vakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because what is actually impermanent, not lasting, transient, incomplete, and perishable, he says is permanent, everlasting, eternal, complete, and imperishable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ca pana jāyati ca jīyati ca mīyati ca cavati ca upapajjati ca, tañca tathā vakkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And where there is being born, growing old, dying, passing away, and being reborn, he says that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idañhi na jāyati na jīyati na mīyati na cavati na upapajjati’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santañca panaññaṃ uttari nissaraṇaṃ, ‘natthaññaṃ uttari nissaraṇan’ti vakkhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And although there is another escape beyond this, he says that there’s no other escape beyond this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvāsattati gotama puññakammā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Gotama, we seventy-two merit-makers are now wielders of power, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vasavattino jātijaraṃ atītā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">having passed beyond rebirth and old age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamantimā vedagū brahmupapatti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is our last rebirth as Brahmā, knowledge-master. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asmābhijappanti janā anekā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And now many people pray to us.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appañhi etaṃ na hi dīghamāyu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But, Baka, the life span here is short, not long, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ tvaṃ baka maññasi dīghamāyuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">though you think it’s long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sataṃ sahassānaṃ nirabbudānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I know that your life span </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyuṃ pajānāmi tavāhaṃ brahme”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is two quinquadecillion years, Brahmā.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anantadassī bhagavāhamasmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Blessed One, I am the one of infinite vision, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātijaraṃ sokamupātivatto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has gone beyond rebirth and old age and sorrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ me purāṇaṃ vatasīlavattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What precepts and observances did I practice in the past? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ācikkha me taṃ yamahaṃ vijaññā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Explain to me so I can understand.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ tvaṃ apāyesi bahū manusse, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You gave drink to many people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pipāsite ghammani samparete; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who were oppressed by thirst and heat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ te purāṇaṃ vatasīlavattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re the precepts and observances you practiced in the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suttappabuddhova anussarāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I recollect it like one who has wakened from sleep. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ eṇikūlasmiṃ janaṃ gahītaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When people at Deer River Bank were seized, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amocayī gayhakaṃ nīyamānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you released the captives as they were led away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ te purāṇaṃ vatasīlavattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the precepts and observances you practiced in the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suttappabuddhova anussarāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I recollect it like one who has wakened from sleep. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṅgāya sotasmiṃ gahītanāvaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a boat on the Ganges River was seized </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Luddena nāgena manussakamyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by a fierce dragon desiring human flesh, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamocayittha balasā pasayha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you freed it wielding mighty force. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ te purāṇaṃ vatasīlavattaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the precepts and observances you practiced in the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suttappabuddhova anussarāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I recollect it like one who has wakened from sleep. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kappo ca te baddhacaro ahosiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I used to be your servant named Kappa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sambuddhimantaṃ vatinaṃ amaññi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You thought he was intelligent and loyal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ te purāṇaṃ vatasīlavattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the precepts and observances you practiced in the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suttappabuddhova anussarāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I recollect it like one who has wakened from sleep.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Addhā pajānāsi mametamāyuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You certainly understand this life span of mine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññepi jānāsi tathā hi buddho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And others, too, you know; that’s why you’re the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā hi tyāyaṃ jalitānubhāvo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s why your blazing glory </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Obhāsayaṃ tiṭṭhati brahmalokan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">lights up even the Brahmā realm.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
