<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.13-13. Andhakavindasutta  - 13. At Andhakavinda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.13. 13. Andhakavindasutta  - 13. At Andhakavinda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā māgadhesu viharati andhakavinde. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Magadhans at Andhakavinda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā rattandhakāratimisāyaṃ abbhokāse nisinno hoti, devo ca ekamekaṃ phusāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was meditating in the open during the dark of night, while a gentle rain drizzled down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ andhakavindaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the beautiful Brahmā Sahampati, lighting up the entirety of Andhakavinda, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho brahmā sahampati bhagavato santike imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and recited these verses in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sevetha pantāni senāsanāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“One should frequent secluded lodgings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Careyya saṃyojanavippamokkhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and practice to be released from fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace ratiṃ nādhigaccheyya tattha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t find enjoyment there, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃghe vase rakkhitatto satīmā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">live in the Saṅgha, guarded and mindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulākulaṃ piṇḍikāya caranto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Walking for alms from family to family, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indriyagutto nipako satimā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with senses guarded, alert and mindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sevetha pantāni senāsanāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">One should frequent secluded lodgings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhayā pamutto abhaye vimutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">free of fear, freed in the fearless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha bheravā sarīsapā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where dreadful serpents slither, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijju sañcarati thanayati devo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where the lightning flashes and the sky thunders </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhakāratimisāya rattiyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the dark of the night; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdi tattha bhikkhu vigatalomahaṃso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">there meditates a mendicant, free of goosebumps. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idañhi jātu me diṭṭhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For this has in fact been seen by me, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nayidaṃ itihītihaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">it isn’t just what the testament says. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekasmiṃ brahmacariyasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Within a single spiritual dispensation </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sahassaṃ maccuhāyinaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a thousand are destroyers of Death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhiyyo pañcasatā sekkhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And of trainees there are more than five hundred, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasā ca dasadhā dasa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ten times ten tens; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe sotasamāpannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">all are stream-enterers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atiracchānagāmino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">freed from rebirth in the animal realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athāyaṃ itarā pajā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as for other people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puññabhāgāti me mano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who I think have shared in merit—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhātuṃ nopi sakkomi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I couldn’t even number them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādassa ottapan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for fear of speaking falsely.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
