<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.07-7. Kokālikasutta  - 7. About Kokālika </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.07. 7. Kokālikasutta  - 7. About Kokālika </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The Appeal </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā divāvihāragato hoti paṭisallīno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha had gone into retreat for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho subrahmā ca paccekabrahmā suddhāvāso ca paccekabrahmā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā paccekaṃ dvārabāhaṃ nissāya aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the independent brahmās Subrahmā and Suddhāvāsa went to the Buddha and stationed themselves one by each door-post. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho subrahmā paccekabrahmā kokālikaṃ bhikkhuṃ ārabbha bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Subrahmā recited this verse about the mendicant Kokālika in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appameyyaṃ paminanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What wise person here would judge </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodha vidvā vikappaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the immeasurable by measuring them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appameyyaṃ pamāyinaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I think anyone who’d do such a thing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nivutaṃ taṃ maññe puthujjanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">must be an ordinary person, wrapped in darkness.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
