<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.09-9. Sundarikasutta  - 9. With Bhāradvāja of Sundarika </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.09. 9. Sundarikasutta  - 9. With Bhāradvāja of Sundarika </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Arahantavagga  - 1. The Perfected Ones </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu viharati sundarikāya nadiyā tīre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the Kosalan lands on the bank of the Sundarika river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sundarikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo sundarikāya nadiyā tīre aggiṃ juhati, aggihuttaṃ paricarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmin Bhāradvāja of Sundarika was serving the sacred flame and performing the fire sacrifice on the bank of the river Sundarika. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sundarikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo aggiṃ juhitvā aggihuttaṃ paricaritvā uṭṭhāyāsanā samantā catuddisā anuvilokesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he looked all around the four directions, wondering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho imaṃ habyasesaṃ bhuñjeyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now who might eat the leftovers of this offering?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho sundarikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle sasīsaṃ pārutaṃ nisinnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He saw the Buddha meditating at the root of a certain tree with his robe pulled over his head. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna vāmena hatthena habyasesaṃ gahetvā dakkhiṇena hatthena kamaṇḍaluṃ gahetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking the leftovers of the offering in his left hand and a pitcher in the right he approached the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sundarikabhāradvājassa brāhmaṇassa padasaddena sīsaṃ vivari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he heard Sundarika’s footsteps the Buddha uncovered his head. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sundarikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo “muṇḍo ayaṃ bhavaṃ, muṇḍako ayaṃ bhavan”ti tatova puna nivattitukāmo ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sundarika thought, “This man is shaven, he is shaven!” And he wanted to turn back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sundarikabhāradvājassa brāhmaṇassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But he thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“muṇḍāpi hi idhekacce brāhmaṇā bhavanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Even some brahmins are shaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yannūnāhaṃ taṃ upasaṅkamitvā jātiṃ puccheyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I go to him and ask about his birth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sundarikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sundarika the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃjacco bhavan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, in what caste were you born?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā jātiṃ puccha caraṇañca puccha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t ask about birth, ask about conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaṭṭhā have jāyati jātavedo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For any wood can surely generate fire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nīcākulīnopi muni dhitimā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A steadfast sage, even though from a low class family, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ājānīyo hoti hirīnisedho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is a thoroughbred checked by conscience. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccena danto damasā upeto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tamed by truth, fulfilled by taming, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedantagū vusitabrahmacariyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a complete knowledge master who has completed the spiritual journey—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaññopanīto tamupavhayetha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who a sacrificer should introduce themselves to, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālena so juhati dakkhiṇeyye”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and make a timely offering to one worthy of a religious donation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Addhā suyiṭṭhaṃ suhutaṃ mama yidaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“My sacrificial offering must have been well performed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ tādisaṃ vedagumaddasāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">since I have met such a knowledge master! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhādisānañhi adassanena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because I’d never met anyone like you </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Añño jano bhuñjati habyasesan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that others ate the leftover offering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhuñjatu bhavaṃ gotamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Eat, Master Gotama, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brāhmaṇo bhavan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you are truly a brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gāthābhigītaṃ me abhojaneyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Food enchanted by a spell isn’t fit for me to eat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sampassataṃ brāhmaṇa nesa dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s not the way of those who see, brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāthābhigītaṃ panudanti buddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddhas reject things enchanted with spells. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme sati brāhmaṇa vuttiresā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since nature is real, brahmin, that’s how they live. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena ca kevalinaṃ mahesiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Serve with other food and drink </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavaṃ kukkuccavūpasantaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the consummate one, the great hermit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Annena pānena upaṭṭhahassu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with defilements ended and remorse stilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettañhi taṃ puññapekkhassa hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For he is the field for the seeker of merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atha kassa cāhaṃ, bho gotama, imaṃ habyasesaṃ dammī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then, Master Gotama, to whom should I give the leftovers of this offering?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvāhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, passāmi sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya yasseso habyaseso bhutto sammā pariṇāmaṃ gaccheyya aññatra, brāhmaṇa, tathāgatassa vā tathāgatasāvakassa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, I don’t see anyone in this world—with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—who can properly digest these leftovers, except for the Realized One or one of his disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena hi tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, taṃ habyasesaṃ appaharite vā chaḍḍehi appāṇake vā udake opilāpehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well then, brahmin, throw out those leftovers where there is little that grows, or drop them into water that has no living creatures.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sundarikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo taṃ habyasesaṃ appāṇake udake opilāpesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Sundarika dropped the leftover offering in water that had no living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so habyaseso udake pakkhitto cicciṭāyati ciṭiciṭāyati sandhūpāyati sampadhūpāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when those leftovers were placed in the water, they sizzled and hissed, steaming and fuming. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma phālo divasaṃsantatto udake pakkhitto cicciṭāyati ciṭiciṭāyati sandhūpāyati sampadhūpāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was an iron cauldron that had been heated all day. If you placed it in the water, it would sizzle and hiss, steaming and fuming. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva so habyaseso udake pakkhitto cicciṭāyati ciṭiciṭāyati sandhūpāyati sampadhūpāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when those leftovers were placed in the water, they sizzled and hissed, steaming and fuming. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sundarikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo saṃviggo lomahaṭṭhajāto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sundarika the brahmin, shocked and awestruck, went up to the Buddha, and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitaṃ kho sundarikabhāradvājaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ bhagavā gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā brāhmaṇa dāru samādahāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When you’re kindling the wood, brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suddhiṃ amaññi bahiddhā hi etaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t imagine this is purity, for it’s just an external. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi tena suddhiṃ kusalā vadanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Experts say that those who wish for purity </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo bāhirena parisuddhimicche. </span></p>
<p class="p3">through externals will not find it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hitvā ahaṃ brāhmaṇa dārudāhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve given up kindling firewood, brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattamevujjalayāmi jotiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">now I just light the inner flame. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niccagginī niccasamāhitatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Always blazing, always serene, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arahaṃ ahaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am a perfected one living the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māno hi te brāhmaṇa khāribhāro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Conceit, brahmin, is the burden of your possessions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodho dhumo bhasmani mosavajjaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">anger your smoke, and lies your ashes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jivhā sujā hadayaṃ jotiṭhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The tongue is the ladle and the heart the fire altar; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attā sudanto purisassa joti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a well-tamed self is a person’s light. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammo rahado brāhmaṇa sīlatittho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The teaching is a lake with shores of ethics, brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāvilo sabbhi sataṃ pasattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">unclouded, praised by the fine to the good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha have vedaguno sinātā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the knowledge-masters go to bathe, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anallagattāva taranti pāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and cross to the far shore without getting wet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṃ dhammo saṃyamo brahmacariyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Truth, principle, restraint, the spiritual life; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majjhe sitā brāhmaṇa brahmapatti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the attainment of the supreme based on the middle, brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa tujjubhūtesu namo karohi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pay homage to the straightforward ones—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamahaṃ naraṃ dhammasārīti brūmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I declare that man to be one who follows the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, sundarikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Bhāradvāja of Sundarika said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññataro ca panāyasmā bhāradvājo arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Bhāradvāja became one of the perfected.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
