<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.04-4. Bilaṅgikasutta  - 4. With Bhāradvāja the Bitter </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.04. 4. Bilaṅgikasutta  - 4. With Bhāradvāja the Bitter </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Arahantavagga  - 1. The Perfected Ones </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho bilaṅgikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmin Bharadvāja the Bitter heard a rumor that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhāradvājagotto kira brāhmaṇo samaṇassa gotamassa santike agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito”ti kupito anattamano yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā tuṇhībhūto ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a brahmin of the Bharadvāja clan had gone forth from the lay life to homelessness in the presence of the ascetic Gotama. Angry and displeased he went to the Buddha and stood silently to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bilaṅgikassa bhāradvājassa brāhmaṇassa cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya bilaṅgikaṃ bhāradvājaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing what Bhāradvāja the Bitter was thinking, addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo appaduṭṭhassa narassa dussati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whoever wrongs a man who has done no wrong, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suddhassa posassa anaṅgaṇassa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a pure man who has not a blemish, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tameva bālaṃ pacceti pāpaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the evil backfires back on the fool, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhumo rajo paṭivātaṃva khitto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like fine dust thrown upwind.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bilaṅgikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Bitter said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abbhaññāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro ca panāyasmā bhāradvājo arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Bhāradvāja became one of the perfected.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
