<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.17-17. Navakammikasutta  - 17. The Builder </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.17. 17. Navakammikasutta  - 17. The Builder </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena navakammikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe kammantaṃ kārāpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Builder was doing some building work in that jungle thicket. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho navakammikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ aññatarasmiṃ sālarukkhamūle nisinnaṃ pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He saw the Buddha sitting down cross-legged at the root of a certain sal tree, with his body straight, and mindfulness established right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvānassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, it occurred to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṃ kho imasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe kammantaṃ kārāpento ramāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I enjoy doing this building work here in the jungle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ samaṇo gotamo kiṃ kārāpento ramatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">I wonder what the ascetic Gotama enjoys doing?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho navakammikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Bhāradvāja the Builder went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ke nu kammantā karīyanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What kind of work do you do </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu sālavane tava; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a mendicant in the sal jungle? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadekako araññasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you find enjoyment </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ratiṃ vindati gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">alone in the wilderness, Gotama?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me vanasmiṃ karaṇīyamatthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s nothing I need to do in the jungle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ucchinnamūlaṃ me vanaṃ visūkaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">my jungle’s cut down at the root, it’s withered away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svāhaṃ vane nibbanatho visallo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With jungle cleared and free of thorns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko rame aratiṃ vippahāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I enjoy being alone in the jungle, having given up discontent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, navakammikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Builder said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
