<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.12-12. Udayasutta  - 12. With Udaya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.12. 12. Udayasutta  - 12. With Udaya </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena udayassa brāhmaṇassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the brahmin Udaya. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho udayo brāhmaṇo bhagavato pattaṃ odanena pūresi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Udaya filled the Buddha’s bowl with rice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena udayassa brāhmaṇassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The next day … and the day after that … Udaya filled the Buddha’s bowl with rice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho udayo brāhmaṇo bhagavato pattaṃ odanena pūretvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when he had filled the Buddha’s bowl for a third time, he said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pakaṭṭhakoyaṃ samaṇo gotamo punappunaṃ āgacchatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This insatiable ascetic Gotama keeps coming back again and again!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Punappunañceva vapanti bījaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Again and again, they sow the seed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ vassati devarājā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">again and again, the lord god sends rain; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ khettaṃ kasanti kassakā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">again and again, farmers plough the field; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ dhaññamupeti raṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">again and again, grain is produced for the nation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ yācakā yācayanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Again and again, the beggars beg; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ dānapatī dadanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">again and again, the donors give. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ dānapatī daditvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Again and again, when the donors have given, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ saggamupenti ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">again and again, they take their place in heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ khīranikā duhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Again and again, dairy farmers milk; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ vaccho upeti mātaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">again and again, a calf cleaves to its mother; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ kilamati phandati ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">again and again, oppressing and intimidating; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ gabbhamupeti mando. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that idiot is reborn again and again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ jāyati mīyati ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Again and again, you’re reborn and die; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ sivathikaṃ haranti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">again and again, you get carried to a charnel ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maggañca laddhā apunabbhavāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they’ve gained the path for no further rebirth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na punappunaṃ jāyati bhūripañño”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one of vast wisdom is not reborn again and again.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, udayo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Udaya said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
