<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.20-20. Bhikkhakasutta  - 20. A Beggar </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.20. 20. Bhikkhakasutta  - 20. A Beggar </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhikkhako brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a begging brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho bhikkhako brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahampi kho, bho gotama, bhikkhako, bhavampi bhikkhako, idha no kiṃ nānākaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, both you and I are beggars. What, then, is the difference between us?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na tena bhikkhako hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You don’t become a beggar </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvatā bhikkhate pare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">just by begging from others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vissaṃ dhammaṃ samādāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who has accepted domestic responsibilities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu hoti na tāvatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">has not yet become a mendicant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yodha puññañca pāpañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But one living a spiritual life </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bāhitvā brahmacariyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has shunned both good and bad, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhāya loke carati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having considered, they live in this world: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sa ve bhikkhūti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who’s called a mendicant.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhikkhako brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the begging brahmin said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
