<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.18-18. Kaṭṭhahārasutta  - 18. Collecting Firewood </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.18. 18. Kaṭṭhahārasutta  - 18. Collecting Firewood </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhāradvājagottassa brāhmaṇassa sambahulā antevāsikā kaṭṭhahārakā māṇavakā yena vanasaṇḍo tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā addasaṃsu bhagavantaṃ tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe nisinnaṃ pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. Disvāna yena bhāradvājagotto brāhmaṇo tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhāradvājagottaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several youths, students of one of the Bhāradvāja brahmins, approached a forest grove while collecting firewood. They saw the Buddha sitting down cross-legged at the root of a certain sal tree, with his body straight, and mindfulness established right there. Seeing this, they went up to Bhāradvāja and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yagghe bhavaṃ jāneyyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please sir, you should know this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asukasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe samaṇo nisinno pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In such and such a forest grove the ascetic Gotama is sitting down cross-legged, with his body straight, and mindfulness established right there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhāradvājagotto brāhmaṇo tehi māṇavakehi saddhiṃ yena so vanasaṇḍo tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Bhāradvāja together with those students went to that forest grove </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavantaṃ tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe nisinnaṃ pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where he saw the Buddha sitting down cross-legged, with his body straight, and mindfulness established right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gambhīrarūpe bahubherave vane, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Deep in the jungle so full of terrors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suññaṃ araññaṃ vijanaṃ vigāhiya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve plunged into the empty, desolate wilderness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniñjamānena ṭhitena vaggunā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Still, steady, and graceful: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sucārurūpaṃ vata bhikkhu jhāyasi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how beautifully you meditate, mendicant! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na yattha gītaṃ napi yattha vāditaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where there is no song or music, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko araññe vanavassito muni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a lonely sage resorts to the wilderness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accherarūpaṃ paṭibhāti maṃ idaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This strikes me as an amazing thing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadekako pītimano vane vase. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that you dwell so joyfully alone in the jungle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maññāmahaṃ lokādhipatisahabyataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I suppose you wish to be reborn in the company </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkhamāno tidivaṃ anuttaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of the supreme sovereign of the heaven of the Three and Thirty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā bhavaṃ vijanamaraññamassito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is that why you resort to the desolate wilderness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tapo idha kubbasi brahmapattiyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to practice austerities for attaining Brahmā?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā kāci kaṅkhā abhinandanā vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Any wishes and hopes that are always attached </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anekadhātūsu puthū sadāsitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to the many and various realms—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāṇamūlappabhavā pajappitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the yearnings sprung from the root of unknowing—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbā mayā byantikatā samūlikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve eliminated them all down to the root. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svāhaṃ akaṅkho asito anūpayo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I’m wishless, unattached, disengaged; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbesu dhammesu visuddhadassano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">amongst all things, my vision is clear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pappuyya sambodhimanuttaraṃ sivaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve attained the state of grace, the supreme awakening; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jhāyāmahaṃ brahma raho visārado”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I meditate alone, brahmin, and self-assured.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhāradvājagotto brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, Bhāradvāja said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
