<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.03-3. Pesalasutta  - 3. Good-Hearted </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.03. 3. Pesalasutta  - 3. Good-Hearted </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā vaṅgīso āḷaviyaṃ viharati aggāḷave cetiye āyasmatā nigrodhakappena upajjhāyena saddhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Vaṅgīsa was staying near Āḷavī, at the Aggāḷava Tree-shrine, together with his mentor, Venerable Nigrodhakappa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā vaṅgīso attano paṭibhānena aññe pesale bhikkhū atimaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Vaṅgīsa looked down on other good-hearted mendicants because of his own poetic virtuosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato vaṅgīsassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alābhā vata me, na vata me lābhā; dulladdhaṃ vata me, na vata me suladdhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s my loss, my misfortune, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yvāhaṃ attano paṭibhānena aññe pesale bhikkhū atimaññāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I look down on other good-hearted mendicants because of my own poetic virtuosity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso attanāva attano vippaṭisāraṃ uppādetvā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, on the occasion of arousing remorse in himself, he recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mānaṃ pajahassu gotama, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give up conceit, Gotama! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mānapathañca pajahassu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Completely abandon the different kinds of conceit! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asesaṃ mānapathasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Besotted with the different kinds of conceit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samucchito vippaṭisārīhuvā cirarattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve had regrets for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Makkhena makkhitā pajā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smeared by smears and slain by conceit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mānahatā nirayaṃ papatanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">people fall into hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Socanti janā cirarattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When people slain by conceit are reborn in hell, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mānahatā nirayaṃ upapannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they grieve for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi socati bhikkhu kadāci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a mendicant who practices rightly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maggajino sammāpaṭipanno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">owning the path, never grieves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittiñca sukhañca anubhoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They enjoy happiness and a good reputation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammadasoti tamāhu pahitattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they rightly call him a ‘Seer of Truth’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā akhilodha padhānavā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So don’t be hard-hearted, be energetic, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nīvaraṇāni pahāya visuddho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with hindrances given up, be pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mānañca pahāya asesaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then with conceit given up completely, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjāyantakaro samitāvī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">use knowledge to make an end, and be at peace.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
