<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.09-9. Koṇḍaññasutta  - 9. With Koṇḍañña </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.09. 9. Koṇḍaññasutta  - 9. With Koṇḍañña </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā aññāsikoṇḍañño sucirasseva yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavato pādāni mukhena ca paricumbati, pāṇīhi ca parisambāhati, nāmañca sāveti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Koṇḍañña Who Understood approached the Buddha after a very long absence. He bowed with his head to the Buddha’s feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“koṇḍaññohaṃ, bhagavā, koṇḍaññohaṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am Koṇḍañña, Blessed One! I am Koṇḍañña, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato vaṅgīsassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho āyasmā aññāsikoṇḍañño sucirasseva yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavato pādāni mukhena ca paricumbati, pāṇīhi ca parisambāhati, nāmañca sāveti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This Venerable Koṇḍañña Who Understood has approached the Buddha after a very long absence. He bowed with his head to the Buddha’s feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘koṇḍaññohaṃ, bhagavā, koṇḍaññohaṃ, sugatā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am Koṇḍañña, Blessed One! I am Koṇḍañña, Holy One!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ āyasmantaṃ aññāsikoṇḍaññaṃ bhagavato sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthaveyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I extoll him in the Buddha’s presence with fitting verses?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭibhāti maṃ, bhagavā, paṭibhāti maṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to speak, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭibhātu taṃ, vaṅgīsā”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then speak as you feel inspired,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso āyasmantaṃ aññāsikoṇḍaññaṃ bhagavato sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vaṅgīsa extolled Koṇḍañña in the Buddha’s presence with fitting verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Buddhānubuddho so thero, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The senior monk who was awakened right after the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">koṇḍañño tibbanikkamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Koṇḍañña, is keenly energetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhī sukhavihārānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He regularly gains blissful meditative states, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivekānaṃ abhiṇhaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the three kinds of seclusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ sāvakena pattabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever can be attained by a disciple </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthusāsanakārinā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who does the Teacher’s bidding, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbassa taṃ anuppattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has attained it all, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamattassa sikkhato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">through diligently training himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahānubhāvo tevijjo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With great power and the three knowledges, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cetopariyāyakovido; </span></p>
<p class="p3">expert in comprehending the minds of others, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Koṇḍañño buddhadāyādo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Koṇḍañña, the heir to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāde vandati satthuno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">bows at the Teacher’s feet.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
