<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.02-2. Aratīsutta  - 2. Dissatisfaction </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.02. 2. Aratīsutta  - 2. Dissatisfaction </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ … pe … āyasmā vaṅgīso āḷaviyaṃ viharati aggāḷave cetiye āyasmatā nigrodhakappena upajjhāyena saddhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Vaṅgīsa was staying near Āḷavī, at the Aggāḷava Tree-shrine, together with his mentor, Venerable Nigrodhakappa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā nigrodhakappo pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto vihāraṃ pavisati, sāyaṃ vā nikkhamati aparajju vā kāle. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time after Venerable Nigrodhakappa had finished his meal, on his return from alms-round, he would enter his dwelling and not emerge for the rest of that day, or the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato vaṅgīsassa anabhirati uppannā hoti, rāgo cittaṃ anuddhaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And at that time Venerable Vaṅgīsa became dissatisfied, as lust infected his mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato vaṅgīsassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alābhā vata me, na vata me lābhā; dulladdhaṃ vata me, na vata me suladdhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s my loss, my misfortune, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa me anabhirati uppannā, rāgo cittaṃ anuddhaṃseti; taṃ kutettha labbhā, yaṃ me paro anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I’ve become dissatisfied, with lust infecting my mind. How is it possible for someone else to dispel my discontent and give rise to satisfaction? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ attanāva attano anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādeyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I do it myself?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso attanāva attano anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādetvā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, on the occasion of dispelling his own discontent and giving rise to satisfaction, he recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aratiñca ratiñca pahāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Giving up discontent and desire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso gehasitañca vitakkaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">along with all thoughts of the lay life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vanathaṃ na kareyya kuhiñci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they wouldn’t get entangled in anything; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbanatho arato sa hi bhikkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">unentangled, undesiring: that’s a real mendicant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yamidha pathaviñca vehāsaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether on this earth or in the sky, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpagatañca jagatogadhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever in the world is included in form </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñci parijīyati sabbamaniccaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">wears out, it is all impermanent; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ samecca caranti mutattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the thoughtful live having comprehended this truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upadhīsu janā gadhitāse, </span></p>
<p class="p3">People are bound to their attachments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhasute paṭighe ca mute ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to what is seen, heard, felt, and thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettha vinodaya chandamanejo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Unstirred, dispel desire for these things; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ettha na limpati taṃ munimāhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for one called ‘a sage’ does not cling to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha saṭṭhinissitā savitakkā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Attached to the sixty wrong views, and full of their own opinions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puthū janatāya adhammā niviṭṭhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">ordinary people are fixed in wrong principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca vaggagatassa kuhiñci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that mendicant wouldn’t join a sectarian group, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No pana duṭṭhullabhāṇī sa bhikkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">still less would they utter lewd speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dabbo cirarattasamāhito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Clever, long serene, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akuhako nipako apihālu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">free of deceit, alert, without envy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃ padaṃ ajjhagamā muni paṭicca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the sage has reached the state of peace; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbuto kaṅkhati kālan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and because he’s extinguished, he awaits his time.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
