<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.06-6. Sāriputtasutta  - 6. With Sāriputta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.06. 6. Sāriputtasutta  - 6. With Sāriputta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā sāriputto sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā sāriputto bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti poriyā vācāya vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk. His words were polished, clear, articulate, and expressed the meaning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca bhikkhū aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasotā dhammaṃ suṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those mendicants were paying heed, paying attention, engaging wholeheartedly, and lending an ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato vaṅgīsassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho āyasmā sāriputto bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti poriyā vācāya vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This Venerable Sāriputta is educating the mendicants. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca bhikkhū aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasotā dhammaṃ suṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those mendicants are paying heed, paying attention, engaging wholeheartedly, and lending an ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthaveyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I extoll him in his presence with fitting verses?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yenāyasmā sāriputto tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward Sāriputta, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭibhāti maṃ, āvuso sāriputta, paṭibhāti maṃ, āvuso sāriputtā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I feel inspired to speak, Reverend Sāriputta! I feel inspired to speak, Reverend Sāriputta!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭibhātu taṃ, āvuso vaṅgīsā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then speak as you feel inspired,” said Sāriputta. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vaṅgīsa extolled Sāriputta in his presence with fitting verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gambhīrapañño medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Deep in wisdom, intelligent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maggāmaggassa kovido; </span></p>
<p class="p3">expert in the variety of paths; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāriputto mahāpañño, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta, so greatly wise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammaṃ deseti bhikkhunaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">teaches Dhamma to the mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃkhittenapi deseti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches in brief, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitthārenapi bhāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or he speaks at length. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāḷikāyiva nigghoso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">His call, like a myna bird, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibhānaṃ udīrayi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">overflows with inspiration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ desayantassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">While he teaches </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suṇanti madhuraṃ giraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mendicants listen to his sweet voice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sarena rajanīyena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sounding attractive, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">savanīyena vaggunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">clear and graceful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udaggacittā muditā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They listen joyfully, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sotaṃ odhenti bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their hearts uplifted.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
