<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.04-4. Ānandasutta  - 4. With Ānanda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.04. 4. Ānandasutta  - 4. With Ānanda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ānando sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi āyasmatā vaṅgīsena pacchāsamaṇena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms with Venerable Vaṅgīsa as his second monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato vaṅgīsassa anabhirati uppannā hoti, rāgo cittaṃ anuddhaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And at that time Venerable Vaṅgīsa became dissatisfied, as lust infected his mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he addressed Ānanda in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kāmarāgena ḍayhāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve got a burning desire for pleasure; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittaṃ me pariḍayhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">My mind is on fire! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu nibbāpanaṃ brūhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, out of compassion, Gotama, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anukampāya gotamā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">tell me how to quench the flames.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saññāya vipariyesā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your mind is on fire </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittaṃ te pariḍayhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">because of a perversion of perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimittaṃ parivajjehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Turn away from the feature of things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">subhaṃ rāgūpasaṃhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s attractive, provoking lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhāre parato passa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">See all conditioned phenomena as other, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhato mā ca attato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as suffering and not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbāpehi mahārāgaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Extinguish the great fire of lust, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā ḍayhittho punappunaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t burn up again and again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asubhāya cittaṃ bhāvehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With mind unified and serene, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaggaṃ susamāhitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">meditate on the ugly aspects of the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sati kāyagatā tyatthu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With mindfulness immersed in the body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbidābahulo bhava. </span></p>
<p class="p3">be full of disillusionment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Animittañca bhāvehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Meditate on the signless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mānānusayamujjaha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">give up the underlying tendency to conceit; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato mānābhisamayā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and when you comprehend conceit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasanto carissasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you will live at peace.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
