<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.11-11. Gaggarāsutta  - 11. At Gaggarā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.11. 11. Gaggarāsutta  - 11. At Gaggarā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā campāyaṃ viharati gaggarāya pokkharaṇiyā tīre mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi sattahi ca upāsakasatehi sattahi ca upāsikāsatehi anekehi ca devatāsahassehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond, together with a large Saṅgha of around five hundred mendicants, seven hundred male and seven hundred female lay followers, and many thousands of deities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tyāssudaṃ bhagavā atirocati vaṇṇena ceva yasasā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha outshone them all in beauty and glory. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato vaṅgīsassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho bhagavā campāyaṃ viharati gaggarāya pokkharaṇiyā tīre mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi sattahi ca upāsakasatehi sattahi ca upāsikāsatehi anekehi ca devatāsahassehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha is staying near Campā on the banks of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond, together with a large Saṅgha of around five hundred mendicants, seven hundred male and seven hundred female lay followers, and many thousands of deities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tyāssudaṃ bhagavā atirocati vaṇṇena ceva yasasā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he outshines them all in beauty and glory. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ bhagavantaṃ sammukhā sāruppāya gāthāya abhitthaveyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I extoll him in his presence with fitting verses?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭibhāti maṃ, bhagavā, paṭibhāti maṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to speak, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭibhātu taṃ, vaṅgīsā”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then speak as you feel inspired,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso bhagavantaṃ sammukhā sāruppāya gāthāya abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vaṅgīsa extolled the Buddha in his presence with fitting verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cando yathā vigatavalāhake nabhe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Like the moon on a cloudless night, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Virocati vigatamalova bhāṇumā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the shining immaculate sun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi aṅgīrasa tvaṃ mahāmuni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">so too Aṅgīrasa, O great sage, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirocasi yasasā sabbalokan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">your glory outshines the entire world.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
