<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.03-3. Kassapagottasutta  - 3. With Kassapagotta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.03. 3. Kassapagottasutta  - 3. With Kassapagotta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā kassapagotto kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Kassapagotta was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā kassapagotto divāvihāragato aññataraṃ chetaṃ ovadati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Kassapagotta, having withdrawn for his day’s meditation, tried to advise a tribal hunter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā āyasmantaṃ kassapagottaṃ saṃvejetukāmā yenāyasmā kassapagotto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ kassapagottaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the deity haunting that forest approached Kassapagotta wanting to stir him up, and recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Giriduggacaraṃ chetaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A tribal hunter wandering the rugged hills </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appapaññaṃ acetasaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is unintelligent, unthinking. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akāle ovadaṃ bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a waste of time to advise him; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mandova paṭibhāti maṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this mendicant seems to me like an idiot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇāti na vijānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The tribal hunter listens without understanding, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āloketi na passati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he looks without seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammasmiṃ bhaññamānasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Though the teaching is spoken, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthaṃ bālo na bujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the fool doesn’t get it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacepi dasa pajjote, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even if you lit ten lamps </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhārayissasi kassapa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and brought them to him, Kassapa, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva dakkhati rūpāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">he wouldn’t see anything, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhu hissa na vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for he has no eyes to see.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā kassapagotto tāya devatāya saṃvejito saṃvegamāpādīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Impelled by that deity, Venerable Kassapagotta was struck with a sense of urgency.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
