<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.06-6. Anuruddhasutta  - 6. With Anuruddha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.06. 6. Anuruddhasutta  - 6. With Anuruddha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā anuruddho kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññatarā tāvatiṃsakāyikā devatā jālinī nāma āyasmato anuruddhassa purāṇadutiyikā yenāyasmā anuruddho tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a certain deity of the company of the Thirty-Three named Penelope had been Anuruddha’s partner in a former life. She went up to Anuruddha, and recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tattha cittaṃ paṇidhehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Set your heart there, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha te vusitaṃ pure; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where you used to live; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāvatiṃsesu devesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">among the gods of the Thirty-Three, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbakāmasamiddhisu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose every desire is granted! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purakkhato parivuto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the fore of a retinue </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devakaññāhi sobhasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of divine maidens, you’ll shine!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Duggatā devakaññāyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Divine maidens are in a sorry state, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkāyasmiṃ patiṭṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">stuck in self-identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te cāpi duggatā sattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those beings too are in a sorry state, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devakaññāhi patthitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who are attached to divine maidens.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na te sukhaṃ pajānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They don’t know pleasure </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye na passanti nandanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who don’t see the Garden of Delight! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āvāsaṃ naradevānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the abode of lordly gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tidasānaṃ yasassinan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the glorious host of Thirty!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na tvaṃ bāle vijānāsi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Fool, don’t you understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā arahataṃ vaco; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the saying of the perfected ones: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccā sabbasaṅkhārā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">all conditions are impermanent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppādavayadhammino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their nature is to rise and fall; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppajjitvā nirujjhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having arisen, they cease; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṃ vūpasamo sukho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their stilling is true bliss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi dāni punāvāso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Penelope, weaver of the web, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devakāyasmi jālini; </span></p>
<p class="p3">now there are no future lives in the hosts of gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikkhīṇo jātisaṃsāro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Transmigration through births is finished, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi dāni punabbhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">now there is no further existence.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
