<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.07-7. Nāgadattasutta  - 7. With Nāgadatta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.07. 7. Nāgadattasutta  - 7. With Nāgadatta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā nāgadatto kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Nāgadatta was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā nāgadatto atikālena gāmaṃ pavisati, atidivā paṭikkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Nāgadatta had been entering the village too early and returning late in the day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā āyasmato nāgadattassa anukampikā atthakāmā āyasmantaṃ nāgadattaṃ saṃvejetukāmā yenāyasmā nāgadatto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ nāgadattaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the deity haunting that forest had compassion for Nāgadatta, wanting what’s best for him. So they approached him wanting to stir him up, and recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kāle pavisa nāgadatta, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Entering too early, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Divā ca āgantvā ativelacārī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and returning after spending too much of the day, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃsaṭṭho gahaṭṭhehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nāgadatta socializes with lay people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samānasukhadukkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">sharing their joys and sorrows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāyāmi nāgadattaṃ suppagabbhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m afraid for Nāgadatta; he’s so reckless </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulesu vinibaddhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in his attachment to families. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā heva maccurañño balavato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">May he not come under the King of Death’s power, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antakassa vasaṃ upesī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">under the sway of the terminator!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā nāgadatto tāya devatāya saṃvejito saṃvegamāpādīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Impelled by that deity, Venerable Nāgadatta was struck with a sense of urgency.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
