<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.01-1. Vivekasutta  - 1. Seclusion </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.01. 1. Vivekasutta  - 1. Seclusion </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ aññataro bhikkhu kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time one of the mendicants was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena so bhikkhu divāvihāragato pāpake akusale vitakke vitakketi gehanissite. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time that mendicant, during their day’s meditation, was thinking bad, unskillful thoughts to do with the lay life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā tassa bhikkhuno anukampikā atthakāmā taṃ bhikkhuṃ saṃvejetukāmā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deity haunting that forest had compassion for that mendicant, and wanted what’s best for them. So they approached that mendicant wanting to stir them up, and addressed them in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vivekakāmosi vanaṃ paviṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You entered the woods desiring seclusion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha te mano niccharatī bahiddhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">yet your mind wanders off to outward things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jano janasmiṃ vinayassu chandaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As a person, you should dispel the desire for people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato sukhī hohisi vītarāgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then you’ll be happy, free of greed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aratiṃ pajahāsi sato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindful, give up discontent; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavāsi sataṃ taṃ sārayāmase; </span></p>
<p class="p3">let us remind you of the way of the good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pātālarajo hi duttaro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The dusty abyss is so hard to cross; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā taṃ kāmarajo avāhari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t let sensual dust drag you down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakuṇo yathā paṃsukunthito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a bird strewn with dirt </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vidhunaṃ pātayati sitaṃ rajaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">sheds that clingy dust with a shake; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhikkhu padhānavā satimā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">so too, an energetic, mindful mendicant </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vidhunaṃ pātayati sitaṃ rajan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">sheds that clingy dust with a shake.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu tāya devatāya saṃvejito saṃvegamāpādīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Impelled by that deity, that mendicant was struck with a sense of urgency.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
