<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.08-8. Kulagharaṇīsutta  - 8. The Mistress of the House </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.08. 8. Kulagharaṇīsutta  - 8. The Mistress of the House </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ aññataro bhikkhu kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time one of the monks was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena so bhikkhu aññatarasmiṃ kule ativelaṃ ajjhogāḷhappatto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time that monk had become too closely involved in the affairs of a certain family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā tassa bhikkhuno anukampikā atthakāmā taṃ bhikkhuṃ saṃvejetukāmā yā tasmiṃ kule kulagharaṇī, tassā vaṇṇaṃ abhinimminitvā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deity haunting that forest had compassion for that monk, wanting what’s best for him. So, wanting to stir him up, they manifested in the appearance of the mistress of that family, approached the monk, and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nadītīresu saṇṭhāne, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“On the banks of the rivers and in the guest houses, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabhāsu rathiyāsu ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in meeting halls and highways, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Janā saṅgamma mantenti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">people come together and gossip: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mañca tañca kimantaran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what’s going on between you and me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bahūhi saddā paccūhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are lots of annoying sounds </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khamitabbā tapassinā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that an austere ascetic must endure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tena maṅku hotabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they mustn’t be dismayed by that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na hi tena kilissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for that’s not what defiles you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca saddaparittāsī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you’re startled by every little sound, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vane vātamigo yathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a wind-deer in the wood, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lahucittoti taṃ āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll call you ‘flighty minded’; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāssa sampajjate vatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and your practice won’t succeed.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
