<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Dutiyabhāga - Part two </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr1.10_root-pli-ms.j. Dutiyabhāga - Part two </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katāpattivāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">The section on “how many offenses” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">1. Pārājikakaṇḍa</span></p>
<p class="p3">1. The chapter on offenses entailing expulsion </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How many kinds of offenses does one commit as a result of having sexual intercourse? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā catasso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits four kinds of offenses? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkhāyite sarīre methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevati, āpatti pārājikassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one has sexual intercourse with an undecomposed corpse, one commits an offense entailing expulsion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena khāyite sarīre methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one has sexual intercourse with a mostly decomposed corpse, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṭṭakate mukhe acchupantaṁ aṅgajātaṁ paveseti, āpatti dukkaṭassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one inserts the penis without touching into a wide open mouth, one commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jatumaṭṭhake pācittiyaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one uses a dildo, one commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā imā catasso āpattiyo āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnaṁ ādiyanapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How many kinds of offenses does one commit as a result of stealing? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnaṁ ādiyanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamāsakaṁ vā atirekapañcamāsakaṁ vā agghanakaṁ adinnaṁ theyyasaṅkhātaṁ ādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when, intending to steal, one steals something worth five _māsaka_ coins or more than five _māsakas_, one commits an offense entailing expulsion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atirekamāsakaṁ vā ūnapañcamāsakaṁ vā agghanakaṁ adinnaṁ theyyasaṅkhātaṁ ādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when, intending to steal, one steals something worth more than one _māsaka_ coin but less than five _māsakas_, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māsakaṁ vā ūnamāsakaṁ vā agghanakaṁ adinnaṁ theyyasaṅkhātaṁ ādiyati, āpatti dukkaṭassa—</span></p>
<p class="p3">when, intending to steal, one steals something worth one _māsaka_ coin or less than one _māsaka_, one commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adinnaṁ ādiyanapaccayā imā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañcicca manussaviggahaṁ jīvitā voropanapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How many kinds of offenses does one commit as a result of intentionally killing a human being? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañcicca manussaviggahaṁ jīvitā voropanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussaṁ odissa opātaṁ khaṇati “papatitvā marissatī”ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one digs a pit for people, thinking, “Falling into it someone will die,” one commits an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">papatite dukkhā vedanā uppajjati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the person experiences pain after falling in in, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">marati, āpatti pārājikassa—</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the person dies, one commits an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sañcicca manussaviggahaṁ jīvitā voropanapaccayā imā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asantaṁ abhūtaṁ uttarimanussadhammaṁ ullapanapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How many kinds of offenses does one commit as a result of untruthfully and groundlessly boasting about a superhuman quality? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asantaṁ abhūtaṁ uttarimanussadhammaṁ ullapanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpiccho icchāpakato asantaṁ abhūtaṁ uttarimanussadhammaṁ ullapati, āpatti pārājikassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when, having bad desires, overcome by desire, one claims a non-existent, unreal superhuman quality, one commits an offense entailing expulsion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo te vihāre vasati so bhikkhu arahā”ti bhaṇati, paṭivijānantassa āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one says, “Whatever monk lives in your dwelling is a perfected one,” and the listener understands, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na paṭivijānantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa—</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the listener does not understand, one commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asantaṁ abhūtaṁ uttarimanussadhammaṁ ullapanapaccayā imā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāro pārājikā niṭṭhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The four offenses entailing expulsion are finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍādi</span></p>
<p class="p3">2. The chapter on offenses entailing suspension, etc. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upakkamitvā asucimocanapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How many kinds of offenses does one commit as a result of emitting semen by means of effort? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upakkamitvā asucimocanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ceteti upakkamati muccati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one intends and makes an effort, and semen is emitted, one commits an offense entailing suspension; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ceteti upakkamati na muccati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one intends and makes an effort, but semen is not emitted, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">payoge dukkaṭaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the effort there is an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upakkamitvā asucimocanapaccayā imā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajjanapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How many kinds of offenses does one commit as a result of making physical contact with a woman? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajjanapaccayā pañca āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits five kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avassutā bhikkhunī avassutassa purisapuggalassa adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ gahaṇaṁ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when a lustful nun consents to a lustful man taking hold of her anywhere below the collar bone but above the knees, she commits an offense entailing expulsion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when a monk touches body with body, he commits an offense entailing suspension; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one touches what is connected to the body with the body, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one touches what is connected to the body with what is connected to the body, one commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅgulipatodake pācittiyaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">for tickling, one commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajjanapaccayā imā pañca āpattiyo āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmaṁ duṭṭhullāhi vācāhi obhāsanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of speaking indecently to a woman, one commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaccamaggaṁ passāvamaggaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when, referring to the anus or the vagina, one praises and disparages, one commits an offense entailing suspension; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaccamaggaṁ passāvamaggaṁ ṭhapetvā adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when, referring to any part below the collar bone but above the knees, apart from the anus or the vagina, one praises and disparages, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when, referring to anything connected to the body, one praises and disparages, one commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attakāmapāricariyāya vaṇṇaṁ bhāsanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of commending the satisfaction of one’s own desires, one commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātugāmassa santike attakāmapāricariyāya vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one encourages a woman to satisfy one’s own desires, one commits an offense entailing suspension; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇḍakassa santike attakāmapāricariyāya vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one encourages a _paṇḍaka_ to satisfy one’s own desires, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiracchānagatassa santike attakāmapāricariyāya vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when one encourages an animal to satisfy one’s own desires, one commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañcarittaṁ samāpajjanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of acting as a matchmaker, one commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭiggaṇhāti vīmaṁsati paccāharati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one accepts the mission, finds out the response, and reports back, one commits an offense entailing suspension; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭiggaṇhāti vīmaṁsati na paccāharati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one accepts the mission, and finds out the response, but does not report back, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭiggaṇhāti na vīmaṁsati na paccāharati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when one accepts the mission, but neither finds out the response, nor reports back, one commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññācikāya kuṭiṁ kārāpanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of having a hut built by means of begging, one commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kārāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one is having it made, then for the effort there is an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṁ piṇḍaṁ anāgate āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when there is one piece left to complete the hut, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ piṇḍe āgate āpatti saṅghādisesassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the last piece is finished, one commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahallakaṁ vihāraṁ kārāpanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of having a large dwelling built, one commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kārāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one is having it made, then for the effort there is an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṁ piṇḍaṁ anāgate, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when there is one piece left to complete the hut, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ piṇḍe āgate āpatti saṅghādisesassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the last piece is finished, one commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuṁ amūlakena pārājikena dhammena anuddhaṁsanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of groundlessly charging a monk with an offense entailing expulsion, one commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anokāsaṁ kārāpetvā cāvanādhippāyo vadeti, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when, without having obtained his permission, one speaks with the aim of making him leave the monastic life, one commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">okāsaṁ kārāpetvā akkosādhippāyo vadeti, āpatti omasavādassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when, having obtained his permission, one speaks with the aim of abusing him, one commits an offense for abusive speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuṁ aññabhāgiyassa adhikaraṇassa kiñci desaṁ lesamattaṁ upādāya pārājikena dhammena anuddhaṁsanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of charging a monk with an offense entailing expulsion, using an unrelated legal issue as a pretext, one commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anokāsaṁ kārāpetvā cāvanādhippāyo vadeti, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when, without having obtained his permission, one speaks with the aim of making him leave the monastic life, one commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">okāsaṁ kārāpetvā akkosādhippāyo vadeti, āpatti omasavādassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when, having obtained his permission, one speaks with the aim of abusing him, one commits an offense for abusive speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghabhedako bhikkhu yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsanāya na paṭinissajjanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of not stopping when pressed up to three times, a monk who is pursuing schism in the Sangha commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">after the motion, he commits an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">after each of the first two announcements, he commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the last announcement is finished, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhedakānuvattakā bhikkhū yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsanāya na paṭinissajjanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of not stopping when pressed up to three times, monks who side with a monk who is pursuing schism commit three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">after the motion, he commits an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">after each of the first two announcements, he commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the last announcement is finished, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbaco bhikkhu yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsanāya na paṭinissajjanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of not stopping when pressed up to three times, a monk who is difficult to correct commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">after the motion, he commits an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">after each of the first two announcements, he commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the last announcement is finished, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuladūsako bhikkhu yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsanāya na paṭinissajjanapaccayā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of not stopping when pressed up to three times, a monk who is a corrupter of families commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">after the motion, he commits an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">after each of the first two announcements, he commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the last announcement is finished, he commits an offense entailing suspension. …</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of, out of disrespect, defecating, urinating, or spitting in water, how many kinds of offenses does one commit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā ekaṁ āpattiṁ āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits one kind of offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkaṭaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā imaṁ ekaṁ āpattiṁ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katāpattivāro niṭṭhito dutiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second section “on how many offenses” is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
