<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Dutiyabhāga - Part two </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr2.16_root-pli-ms.j. Dutiyabhāga - Part two </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">8. Samuccayavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">8. The section that collects together </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyanapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses that are a result of consenting to physical contact, how many kinds of offenses does one commit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyanapaccayā pañca āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits five kinds of offenses : </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassutā bhikkhunī avassutassa purisapuggalassa adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ gahaṇaṁ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when a lustful nun consents to a lustful man taking hold of her anywhere below the collar bone but above the knees, she commits an offense entailing expulsion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when a monk touches body with body, he commits an offense entailing suspension; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one touches what is connected to the body with the body, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one touches what is connected to the body with what is connected to the body, one commits an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅgulipatodake pācittiyaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">for tickling, one commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyanapaccayā imā pañca āpattiyo āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to these offenses, to how many of the four kinds of failure do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">In how many of the seven classes of offenses are they found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses do they originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">To which of the four kinds of legal issues do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues are they settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ dve vipattiyo bhajanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They belong to two kinds of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sīlavipattiṁ, siyā ācāravipattiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be failure in morality; they may be failure in conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ pañcahi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are found in five classes of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā pārājikāpattikkhandhena, siyā saṅghādisesāpattikkhandhena, siyā thullaccayāpattikkhandhena, siyā pācittiyāpattikkhandhena, siyā dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be in the class of offenses entailing expulsion; they may be in the class of offenses entailing suspension; they may be in the class of serious offenses; they may be in the class of offenses entailing confession; they may be in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ ekena samuṭṭhānena samuṭṭhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They originate in one way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti, na vācato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ āpattādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are legal issues arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ tīhi samathehi sammanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are settled in three ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca paṭiññātakaraṇena ca, siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena ca …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; or they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses that are a result of asking for curd and then eating it, how many kinds of offenses does she commit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanapaccayā dve āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She commits two kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when she receives it with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa—</span></p>
<p class="p3">for every mouthful, she commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanapaccayā imā dve āpattiyo āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to these offenses, to how many of the four kinds of failure do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">In how many of the seven classes of offenses are they found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses do they originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">To which of the four kinds of legal issues do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues are they settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ ekaṁ vipattiṁ bhajanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They belong to one kind of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ācāravipattiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">failure in conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ dvīhi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are found in two classes of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā pāṭidesanīyāpattikkhandhena, siyā dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be in the class of offenses entailing acknowledgment; they may be in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ catūhi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They originate in four ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato samuṭṭhanti, na vācato na cittato;</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body, not from speech or mind; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato ca vācato ca samuṭṭhanti, na cittato;</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and speech, not from mind; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti na vācato;</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato ca vācato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ, āpattādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are legal issues arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ tīhi samathehi sammanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are settled in three ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca paṭiññātakaraṇena ca, siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; or they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuccayavāro niṭṭhito aṭṭhamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth section that collects together is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭha paccayavārā niṭṭhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eight sections on “as a result of” are finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(…)</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunivibhaṅge soḷasa mahāvārā niṭṭhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Concluded are the sixteen Great Synopses in the Nuns’ Analysis</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
