<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Paṭhamabhāga - Part one </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr2.8_root-pli-ms.j. Paṭhamabhāga - Part one </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">8. Samuccayavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">8. The section that collects together </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassutā bhikkhunī avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyantī kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When a lustful nun consents to a lustful man making physical contact with her, how many kinds of offenses does she commit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassutā bhikkhunī avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyantī tisso āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ gahaṇaṁ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when she consents to him taking hold of her anywhere below the collar bone but above the knees, she commits an offense entailing expulsion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubbhakkhakaṁ adhojāṇumaṇḍalaṁ gahaṇaṁ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when she consents to him taking hold of her above the collar bone or below the knees, she commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ gahaṇaṁ sādiyati, āpatti dukkaṭassa—</span></p>
<p class="p3">when she consents to him taking hold of something connected to her body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avassutā bhikkhunī avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyantī imā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to these offenses, to how many of the four kinds of failure do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">In how many of the seven classes of offenses are they found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses do they originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">To which of the four kinds of legal issues do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues are they settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ dve vipattiyo bhajanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They belong to two kinds of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sīlavipattiṁ, siyā ācāravipattiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be failure in morality; they may be failure in conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ tīhi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are found in three classes of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā pārājikāpattikkhandhena, siyā thullaccayāpattikkhandhena, siyā dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be in the class of offenses entailing expulsion; they may be in the class of serious offenses; they may be in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ ekena samuṭṭhānena samuṭṭhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They originate in one way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti, na vācato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ āpattādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are legal issues arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ tīhi samathehi sammanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are settled in three ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca paṭiññātakaraṇena ca, siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena ca …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; or they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjantī kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When asking for curd and then eating it, how many kinds of offenses does she commit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjantī dve āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She commits two kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhuñjissāmīti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when she receives it with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjantī imā dve āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to these offenses, to how many of the four kinds of failure do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">In how many of the seven classes of offenses are they found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses do they originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">To which of the four kinds of legal issues do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues are they settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ ekaṁ vipattiṁ bhajanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They belong to one kind of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ācāravipattiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">failure in conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ dvīhi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are found in two classes of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā pāṭidesanīyāpattikkhandhena, siyā dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be in the class of offenses entailing acknowledgment; they may be in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ catūhi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They originate in four ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato samuṭṭhanti na vācato na cittato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">from body, not from speech or mind; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato ca vācato ca samuṭṭhanti na cittato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and speech, not from mind; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti na vācato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato ca vācato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ—āpattādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are legal issues arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ tīhi samathehi sammanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are settled in three ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca paṭiññātakaraṇena ca, siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; or they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuccayavāro niṭṭhito aṭṭhamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth section that collects together is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
