<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Dutiyabhāga - Part two </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr1.13_root-pli-ms.j. Dutiyabhāga - Part two </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">5. Samuṭṭhānavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">5. The section on origin </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā āpattiyo channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses that are a result of having sexual intercourse, through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses do they originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā āpattiyo channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ ekena samuṭṭhānena samuṭṭhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They originate in one way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti, na vācato …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā āpatti channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhāti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offense that is a result of, out of disrespect, defecating, urinating, or spitting in water, through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses does it originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā āpatti channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ ekena samuṭṭhānena samuṭṭhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It originates in one way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhāti, na vācato …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuṭṭhānavāro niṭṭhito pañcamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth section on origin is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
