<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Dutiyabhāga - Part two </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr2.13_root-pli-ms.j. Dutiyabhāga - Part two </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">5. Samuṭṭhānavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">5. The section on origins </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyanapaccayā āpattiyo channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses that are a result of consenting to physical contact, through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses do they originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyanapaccayā āpattiyo channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ ekena samuṭṭhānena samuṭṭhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They originate in one way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti, na vācato …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanapaccayā āpattiyo channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses that are a result of asking for curd and then eating it, through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses do they originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanapaccayā āpattiyo channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ catūhi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They originate in four ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato samuṭṭhanti, na vācato na cittato;</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body, not from speech or mind; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato ca vācato ca samuṭṭhanti, na cittato;</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and speech, not from mind; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti, na vācato;</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kāyato ca vācato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">from body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuṭṭhānavāro niṭṭhito pañcamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth section on origins is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
