<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.079-79. Parihānasutta  - 79. Decline </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.079. 79. Parihānasutta  - 79. Decline </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Yamakavagga  - 8. Pairs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhime, bhikkhave, dhammā sekhassa bhikkhuno parihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These eight things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammārāmatā, bhassārāmatā, niddārāmatā, saṅgaṇikārāmatā, indriyesu aguttadvāratā, bhojane amattaññutā, saṃsaggārāmatā, papañcārāmatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They don’t guard the sense doors and they eat too much. They relish closeness and proliferation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭha dhammā sekhassa bhikkhuno parihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These eight things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhime, bhikkhave, dhammā sekhassa bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These eight things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kammārāmatā, na bhassārāmatā, na niddārāmatā, na saṅgaṇikārāmatā, indriyesu guttadvāratā, bhojane mattaññutā, asaṃsaggārāmatā, nippapañcārāmatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t relish work, talk, and sleep. They guard the sense doors, and they don’t eat too much. They don’t relish closeness and proliferation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭha dhammā sekhassa bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These eight things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
