<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.084-84. Corasutta  - 84. A Master Thief </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.084. 84. Corasutta  - 84. A Master Thief </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sativagga  - 9. Mindfulness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato mahācoro khippaṃ pariyāpajjati, na ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a master thief with eight factors is soon executed, and doesn’t have long to live. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaharantassa paharati, anavasesaṃ ādiyati, itthiṃ hanati, kumāriṃ dūseti, pabbajitaṃ vilumpati, rājakosaṃ vilumpati, accāsanne kammaṃ karoti, na ca nidhānakusalo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He attacks unprovoked. He steals everything without exception. He kills a woman. He rapes a girl. He robs a monk. He robs the royal treasury. He works close to home. He’s not skilled at hiding his booty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahaṅgehi samannāgato mahācoro khippaṃ pariyāpajjati, na ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A master thief with these eight factors is soon executed, and doesn’t have long to live. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato mahācoro na khippaṃ pariyāpajjati, ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A master thief with eight factors is not soon executed, and lives long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na appaharantassa paharati, na anavasesaṃ ādiyati, na itthiṃ hanati, na kumāriṃ dūseti, na pabbajitaṃ vilumpati, na rājakosaṃ vilumpati, na accāsanne kammaṃ karoti, nidhānakusalo ca hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t attack unprovoked. He doesn’t steal everything without exception. He doesn’t kill a woman. He doesn’t rape a girl. He doesn’t rob a monk. He doesn’t rob the royal treasury. He doesn’t work close to home. He’s skilled at hiding his booty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahaṅgehi samannāgato mahācoro na khippaṃ pariyāpajjati, ciraṭṭhitiko hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A master thief with these eight factors is not soon executed, and lives long.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
