<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.044-44. Vāseṭṭhasutta  - 44. With Vāseṭṭha on the Sabbath </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.044. 44. Vāseṭṭhasutta  - 44. With Vāseṭṭha on the Sabbath </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Uposathavagga  - 5. Sabbath </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vāseṭṭho upāsako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho vāseṭṭhaṃ upāsakaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the layman Vāseṭṭha went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato, vāseṭṭha, uposatho upavuttho mahapphalo hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Vāseṭṭha, the observance of the sabbath with its eight factors is very fruitful and beneficial and glorious and effective. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aninditā saggamupenti ṭhānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">blameless, they go to a heavenly place.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, vāseṭṭho upāsako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Vāseṭṭha said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“piyā me, bhante, ñātisālohitā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavaseyyuṃ, piyānampi me assa ñātisālohitānaṃ dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If my loved ones—relatives and kin—were to observe this sabbath with its eight factors, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe cepi, bhante, khattiyā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavaseyyuṃ, sabbesampissa khattiyānaṃ dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya. Sabbe cepi, bhante, brāhmaṇā … pe … vessā … suddā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavaseyyuṃ, sabbesampissa suddānaṃ dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If all the aristocrats, brahmins, merchants, and workers were to observe this sabbath with its eight factors, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, vāseṭṭha, evametaṃ, vāseṭṭha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, Vāseṭṭha! That’s so true, Vāseṭṭha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe cepi, vāseṭṭha, khattiyā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavaseyyuṃ, sabbesampissa khattiyānaṃ dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya. Sabbe cepi, vāseṭṭha, brāhmaṇā … pe … vessā … suddā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavaseyyuṃ, sabbesampissa suddānaṃ dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If all the aristocrats, brahmins, merchants, and workers were to observe this sabbath with its eight factors, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadevako cepi, vāseṭṭha, loko samārako sabrahmako sassamaṇabrāhmaṇī pajā sadevamanussā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavaseyyuṃ, sadevakassapissa lokassa samārakassa sabrahmakassa sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the whole world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—were to observe this sabbath with its eight factors, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime cepi, vāseṭṭha, mahāsālā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavaseyyuṃ, imesampissa mahāsālānaṃ dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya (). </span></p>
<p class="p3">If these great sal trees were to observe this sabbath with its eight factors, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness—if they were sentient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana vādo manussabhūtassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How much more then a human being!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
