<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.024-24. Dutiyahatthakasutta  - 24. With Hatthaka (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.024. 24. Dutiyahatthakasutta  - 24. With Hatthaka (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Gahapativagga  - 3. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā āḷaviyaṃ viharati aggāḷave cetiye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Āḷavī, at the Aggāḷava Tree-shrine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho hatthako āḷavako pañcamattehi upāsakasatehi parivuto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho hatthakaṃ āḷavakaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī, escorted by around five hundred lay followers, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to Hatthaka: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahatī kho tyāyaṃ, hatthaka, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Hatthaka, you have a large congregation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ pana tvaṃ, hatthaka, imaṃ mahatiṃ parisaṃ saṅgaṇhāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you bring together such a large congregation?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yānimāni, bhante, bhagavatā desitāni cattāri saṅgahavatthūni, tehāhaṃ imaṃ mahatiṃ parisaṃ saṅgaṇhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I bring together such a large congregation by using the four ways of being inclusive as taught by the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ, bhante, yaṃ jānāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I know that a person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ dānena saṅgahetabbo’ti, taṃ dānena saṅgaṇhāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">can be included by a gift, I include them by giving a gift. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ jānāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I know that a person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ peyyavajjena saṅgahetabbo’ti, taṃ peyyavajjena saṅgaṇhāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">can be included by kindly words, I include them by kindly words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ jānāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I know that a person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ atthacariyāya saṅgahetabbo’ti, taṃ atthacariyāya saṅgaṇhāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">can be included by taking care of them, I include them by caring for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ jānāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I know that a person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ samānattatāya saṅgahetabbo’ti, taṃ samānattatāya saṅgaṇhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can be included by equality, I include them by treating them equally. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃvijjanti kho pana me, bhante, kule bhogā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But also, sir, my family is wealthy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daliddassa kho no tathā sotabbaṃ maññantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They wouldn’t think that a poor person was worth listening to in the same way.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, hatthaka. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Hatthaka! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yoni kho tyāyaṃ, hatthaka, mahatiṃ parisaṃ saṅgahetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the right way to bring together a large congregation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, hatthaka, atītamaddhānaṃ mahatiṃ parisaṃ saṅgahesuṃ, sabbe te imeheva catūhi saṅgahavatthūhi mahatiṃ parisaṃ saṅgahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether in the past, future, or present, all those who have brought together a large congregation have done so by using these four ways of being inclusive.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi hi keci, hatthaka, anāgatamaddhānaṃ mahatiṃ parisaṃ saṅgaṇhissanti, sabbe te imeheva catūhi saṅgahavatthūhi mahatiṃ parisaṃ saṅgaṇhissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi hi keci, hatthaka, etarahi mahatiṃ parisaṃ saṅgaṇhanti, sabbe te imeheva catūhi saṅgahavatthūhi mahatiṃ parisaṃ saṅgaṇhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho hatthako āḷavako bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassito samādapito samuttejito sampahaṃsito uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired Hatthaka of Āḷavī with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā acirapakkante hatthake āḷavake bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, not long after Hatthaka had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, acchariyehi abbhutehi dhammehi samannāgataṃ hatthakaṃ āḷavakaṃ dhāretha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should remember the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī as someone who has eight amazing and incredible qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddho, bhikkhave, hatthako āḷavako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s faithful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlavā, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">ethical, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hirīmā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">conscientious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">prudent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto … </span></p>
<p class="p3">learned, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cāgavā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">generous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavā, bhikkhave, hatthako āḷavako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appiccho, bhikkhave, hatthako āḷavako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has few wishes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi acchariyehi abbhutehi dhammehi samannāgataṃ hatthakaṃ āḷavakaṃ dhārethā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should remember the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī as someone who has these eight amazing and incredible qualities.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
