<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.081-81. Satisampajaññasutta  - 81. Mindfulness and Situational Awareness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.081. 81. Satisampajaññasutta  - 81. Mindfulness and Situational Awareness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sativagga  - 9. Mindfulness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satisampajaññe, bhikkhave, asati satisampajaññavipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti hirottappaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when there is no mindfulness and situational awareness, one who lacks mindfulness and situational awareness has destroyed a vital condition for conscience and prudence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hirottappe asati hirottappavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti indriyasaṃvaro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no conscience and prudence, one who lacks conscience and prudence has destroyed a vital condition for sense restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indriyasaṃvare asati indriyasaṃvaravipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti sīlaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīle asati sīlavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no ethical conduct, one who lacks ethics has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsamādhimhi asati sammāsamādhivipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathābhūtañāṇadassane asati yathābhūtañāṇadassanavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti nibbidāvirāgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbidāvirāge asati nibbidāvirāgavipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rukkho sākhāpalāsavipanno. Tassa papaṭikāpi na pāripūriṃ gacchati, tacopi … pheggupi … sāropi na pāripūriṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, satisampajaññe asati satisampajaññavipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti hirottappaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when there is no mindfulness and situational awareness, one who lacks mindfulness and situational awareness has destroyed a vital condition for conscience and prudence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hirottappe asati hirottappavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no conscience and prudence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisampajaññe, bhikkhave, sati satisampajaññasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti hirottappaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is mindfulness and situational awareness, one who has fulfilled mindfulness and situational awareness has fulfilled a vital condition for conscience and prudence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hirottappe sati hirottappasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti indriyasaṃvaro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is conscience and prudence, a person who has fulfilled conscience and prudence has fulfilled a vital condition for sense restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indriyasaṃvare sati indriyasaṃvarasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti sīlaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is sense restraint, one who has sense restraint has fulfilled a vital condition for ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīle sati sīlasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is ethical conduct, one who has fulfilled ethical conduct has fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsamādhimhi sati sammāsamādhisampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathābhūtañāṇadassane sati yathābhūtañāṇadassanasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti nibbidāvirāgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbidāvirāge sati nibbidāvirāgasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rukkho sākhāpalāsasampanno. Tassa papaṭikāpi pāripūriṃ gacchati, tacopi … pheggupi … sāropi pāripūriṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, satisampajaññe sati satisampajaññasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti hirottappaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when there is mindfulness and situational awareness, one who has fulfilled mindfulness and situational awareness has fulfilled a vital condition for conscience and prudence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hirottappe sati hirottappasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is conscience and prudence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttiñāṇadassanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
