<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.090-90. Sammāvattanasutta  - 90. Proper Behavior in a Case of Aggravated Misconduct </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.090. 90. Sammāvattanasutta  - 90. Proper Behavior in a Case of Aggravated Misconduct </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sativagga  - 9. Mindfulness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tassapāpiyasikakammakatena, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā aṭṭhasu dhammesu sammā vattitabbaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant who has been convicted of aggravated misconduct must behave themselves properly in eight respects. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na upasampādetabbo, na nissayo dātabbo, na sāmaṇero upaṭṭhāpetabbo, na bhikkhunovādakasammuti sāditabbā, sammatenapi bhikkhuniyo na ovaditabbā, na kāci saṃghasammuti sāditabbā, na kismiñci paccekaṭṭhāne ṭhapetabbo, na ca tena mūlena vuṭṭhāpetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They must not perform an ordination, give dependence, or be attended by a novice. They must not consent to being appointed as adviser for nuns, and if they are appointed they should not give such advice. They must not consent to any Saṅgha appointment. They must not be put in an isolated place. They must not give rehabilitation in any offense similar to that which they transgressed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassapāpiyasikakammakatena, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā imesu aṭṭhasu dhammesu sammā vattitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has been convicted of aggravated misconduct must behave themselves properly in these eight respects.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sativaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satipuṇṇiyamūlena, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Corasamaṇena pañcamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaso pattappasādena, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭisāraṇīyañca vattananti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
