<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.085-85. Samaṇasutta  - 85. Terms for the Realized One </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.085. 85. Samaṇasutta  - 85. Terms for the Realized One </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sativagga  - 9. Mindfulness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Samaṇo’ti, bhikkhave, tathāgatassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘Ascetic’ is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Brāhmaṇo’ti, bhikkhave, tathāgatassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Brahmin’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Vedagū’ti, bhikkhave, tathāgatassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Knowledge Master’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Bhisakko’ti, bhikkhave, tathāgatassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Healer’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Nimmalo’ti, bhikkhave, tathāgatassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Unstained’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Vimalo’ti, bhikkhave, tathāgatassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Immaculate’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ñāṇī’ti, bhikkhave, tathāgatassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Knower’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Vimutto’ti, bhikkhave, tathāgatassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ‘Freed’ are terms for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ samaṇena pattabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The supreme should be attained by an ascetic, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brāhmaṇena vusīmatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a brahmin who has lived the life; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ vedagunā pattabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">it should be attained by a knowledge master, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhisakkena anuttaraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a healer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ nimmalena pattabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The supreme should be attained by the unstained, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimalena sucīmatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">stainless and pure; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ ñāṇinā ca pattabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">it should be attained by a knower, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttena anuttaraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who is free. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṃ vijitasaṅgāmo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am victorious in battle! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mutto mocemi bandhanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Released, I release others from their chains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāgomhi paramadanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am a dragon completely tamed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asekho parinibbuto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">an adept, I am extinguished.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
