<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.047-47. Dutiyavisākhāsutta  - 47. With Visākhā on the Loveable Gods </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.047. 47. Dutiyavisākhāsutta  - 47. With Visākhā on the Loveable Gods </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Uposathavagga  - 5. Sabbath </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho visākhā migāramātā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Visākhā, Migāra’s mother, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho visākhaṃ migāramātaraṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said to her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi kho, visākhe, dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manāpakāyikānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Visākhā, when they have eight qualities females—when their body breaks up, after death—are reborn in company with the Gods of the Lovable Host. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, visākhe, mātugāmo yassa mātāpitaro bhattuno denti atthakāmā hitesino anukampakā anukampaṃ upādāya tassa hoti pubbuṭṭhāyinī pacchānipātinī kiṅkārapaṭissāvinī manāpacārinī piyavādinī … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take the case of a female whose mother and father give her to a husband wanting what’s best for her, out of kindness and compassion. She would get up before him and go to bed after him, and be obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cāgavatī kho pana hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s generous. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati muttacāgā payatapāṇinī vossaggaratā yācayogā dānasaṃvibhāgaratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, visākhe, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manāpakāyikānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have these eight qualities females—when their body breaks up, after death—are reborn in company with the Gods of the Lovable Host. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo naṃ bharati sabbadā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’d never look down on her husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niccaṃ ātāpi ussuko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s always keen to work hard, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ sabbakāmadaṃ posaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">always looking after her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhattāraṃ nātimaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and bringing whatever she wants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāpi sotthi bhattāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a good woman never scolds her husband </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">issāvādena rosaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with jealous words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhattu ca garuno sabbe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being astute, she reveres </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭipūjeti paṇḍitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those respected by her husband. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṭṭhāhikā analasā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She gets up early, works tirelessly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgahitaparijjanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and manages the domestic help. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhattu manāpaṃ carati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s loveable to her husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambhataṃ anurakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and preserves his wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evaṃ vattati nārī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lady who fulfills these duties </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhattu chandavasānugā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">according to her husband’s desire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manāpā nāma te devā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reborn among the gods </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha sā upapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">called ‘Loveable’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
