<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.041-41. Saṅkhittūposathasutta  - 41. The Sabbath With Eight Factors, In Brief </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.041. 41. Saṅkhittūposathasutta  - 41. The Sabbath With Eight Factors, In Brief </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Uposathavagga  - 5. Sabbath </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato, bhikkhave, uposatho upavuttho mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso mahājutiko mahāvipphāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the observance of the sabbath with its eight factors is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ upavuttho ca, bhikkhave, aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato uposatho mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso mahājutiko mahāvipphāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how should it be observed? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple reflects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yāvajīvaṃ arahanto pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭiviratā nihitadaṇḍā nihitasatthā lajjī dayāpannā, sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampino viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭivirato nihitadaṇḍo nihitasattho lajjī dayāpanno, sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I’ll be scrupulous and kind, and live full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā paṭhamena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its first factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yāvajīvaṃ arahanto adinnādānaṃ pahāya adinnādānā paṭiviratā dinnādāyī dinnapāṭikaṅkhī, athenena sucibhūtena attanā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up stealing. They take only what’s given, and expect only what’s given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ adinnādānaṃ pahāya adinnādānā paṭivirato dinnādāyī dinnapāṭikaṅkhī, athenena sucibhūtena attanā viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up stealing. I’ll take only what’s given, and expect only what’s given. I’ll keep myself clean by not thieving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā dutiyena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its second factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yāvajīvaṃ arahanto abrahmacariyaṃ pahāya brahmacārino ārācārino viratā methunā gāmadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the common practice of sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ abrahmacariyaṃ pahāya brahmacārī ārācārī virato methunā gāmadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up unchastity. I will be celibate, set apart, avoiding the common practice of sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā tatiyena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its third factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yāvajīvaṃ arahanto musāvādaṃ pahāya musāvādā paṭiviratā saccavādino saccasandhā thetā paccayikā avisaṃvādako lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They’re honest and trustworthy, and don’t trick the world with their words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ musāvādaṃ pahāya musāvādā paṭivirato saccavādī saccasandho theto paccayiko avisaṃvādako lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up lying. I’ll speak the truth and stick to the truth. I’ll be honest and trustworthy, and won’t trick the world with my words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā catutthena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its fourth factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yāvajīvaṃ arahanto surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānaṃ pahāya surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭiviratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānaṃ pahāya surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭivirato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā pañcamena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its fifth factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yāvajīvaṃ arahanto ekabhattikā rattūparatā viratā vikālabhojanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and from food at the wrong time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ ekabhattiko rattūparato virato vikālabhojanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā chaṭṭhena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its sixth factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yāvajīvaṃ arahanto naccagītavāditavisūkadassanamālāgandhavilepanadhāraṇamaṇḍanavibhūsanaṭṭhānaṃ pahāya naccagītavāditavisūkadassanamālāgandhavilepanadhāraṇamaṇḍanavibhūsanaṭṭhānā paṭiviratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up dancing, singing, music, and seeing shows; and beautifying and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ naccagītavāditavisūkadassanamālāgandhavilepanadhāraṇamaṇḍanavibhūsanaṭṭhānaṃ pahāya naccagītavāditavisūkadassanamālāgandhavilepanadhāraṇamaṇḍanavibhūsanaṭṭhānā paṭivirato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up dancing, singing, music, and seeing shows; and beautifying and adorning myself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā sattamena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its seventh factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yāvajīvaṃ arahanto uccāsayanamahāsayanaṃ pahāya uccāsayanamahāsayanā paṭiviratā nīcaseyyaṃ kappenti—mañcake vā tiṇasanthārake vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious beds. They sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ uccāsayanamahāsayanaṃ pahāya uccāsayanamahāsayanā paṭivirato nīcaseyyaṃ kappemi—mañcake vā tiṇasanthārake vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I’ll sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā aṭṭhamena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its eighth factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ upavuttho kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato uposatho mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso mahājutiko mahāvipphāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The observance of the sabbath with its eight factors in this way is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
