<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.005-5. Paṭhamalokadhammasutta  - 5. Worldly Conditions (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.005. 5. Paṭhamalokadhammasutta  - 5. Worldly Conditions (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Mettāvagga  - 1. Love </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhime, bhikkhave, lokadhammā lokaṃ anuparivattanti, loko ca aṭṭha lokadhamme anuparivattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world revolves around the eight worldly conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābho ca, alābho ca, yaso ca, ayaso ca, nindā ca, pasaṃsā ca, sukhañca, dukkhañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gain and loss, fame and disgrace, praise and blame, pleasure and pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭha lokadhammā lokaṃ anuparivattanti, loko ca ime aṭṭha lokadhamme anuparivattatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world revolves around these eight worldly conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābho alābho ca yasāyaso ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gain and loss, fame and disgrace, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nindā pasaṃsā ca sukhaṃ dukhañca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">praise and blame, and pleasure and pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete aniccā manujesu dhammā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These qualities among people are impermanent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asassatā vipariṇāmadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">transient, and perishable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete ca ñatvā satimā sumedho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A clever and mindful person knows these things, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avekkhati vipariṇāmadhamme; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing that they’re perishable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iṭṭhassa dhammā na mathenti cittaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Desirable things don’t disturb their mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniṭṭhato no paṭighātameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor are they repelled by the undesirable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassānurodhā atha vā virodhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Both favoring and opposing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vidhūpitā atthaṅgatā na santi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are cleared and ended, they are no more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Padañca ñatvā virajaṃ asokaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing the stainless, sorrowless state, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammappajānāti bhavassa pāragū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they understand rightly, going beyond rebirth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
