<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.058-58. Dutiyaāhuneyyasutta  - 58. Worthy of Offerings to the Gods (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.058. 58. Dutiyaāhuneyyasutta  - 58. Worthy of Offerings to the Gods (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Gotamīvagga  - 6. Gotamī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A mendicant with eight factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the code of conduct, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto hoti … pe … diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and understanding them with right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraddhavīriyo viharati thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and gaining skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraññiko hoti pantasenāsano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aratiratisaho hoti, uppannaṃ aratiṃ abhibhuyya abhibhuyya viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They prevail over desire and discontent, and live having mastered desire and discontent whenever they arose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhayabheravasaho hoti, uppannaṃ bhayabheravaṃ abhibhuyya abhibhuyya viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They prevail over fear and dread, and live having mastered fear and dread whenever they arose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsavānaṃ khayā … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these eight factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
