<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.060-60. Gihisāmīcisutta  - 60. Lay Practice </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.060. 60. Gihisāmīcisutta  - 60. Lay Practice </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Puññābhisandavagga  - 6. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi kho, gahapati, dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako gihisāmīcipaṭipadaṃ paṭipanno hoti yasopaṭilābhiniṃ saggasaṃvattanikaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, when a noble disciple does four things they are practicing appropriately for a layperson, which brings fame and leads to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paccupaṭṭhito hoti cīvarena, bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paccupaṭṭhito hoti piṇḍapātena, bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paccupaṭṭhito hoti senāsanena, bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paccupaṭṭhito hoti gilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple serves the mendicant Saṅgha with robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, gahapati, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako gihisāmīcipaṭipadaṃ paṭipanno hoti yasopaṭilābhiniṃ saggasaṃvattanikanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple does these four things they are practicing appropriately for a layperson, which brings fame and leads to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihisāmīcipaṭipadaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who are astute practice the way </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭipajjanti paṇḍitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s appropriate for laypeople. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammaggate sīlavante, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They provide those who are ethical </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvarena upaṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and on the right path with robes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piṇḍapātasayanena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">alms-food, lodgings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānappaccayena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ divā ca ratto ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their merit always grows </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadā puññaṃ pavaḍḍhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by day and by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saggañca kamatiṭṭhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They pass on to a place in heaven, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammaṃ katvāna bhaddakan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having done excellent deeds.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññābhisandavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve puññābhisandā dve ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃvāsā samajīvino; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suppavāsā sudatto ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhojanaṃ gihisāmicīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
