<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.058-58. Sudattasutta  - 58. Sudatta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.058. 58. Sudattasutta  - 58. Sudatta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Puññābhisandavagga  - 6. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhojanaṃ, gahapati, dadamāno ariyasāvako paṭiggāhakānaṃ cattāri ṭhānāni deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, when a noble disciple gives food, they give the recipients four things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyuṃ deti, vaṇṇaṃ deti, sukhaṃ deti, balaṃ deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Long life, beauty, happiness, and strength. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyuṃ kho pana datvā āyussa bhāgī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving long life, they have long life as a god or human. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaṇṇaṃ datvā … sukhaṃ datvā … balaṃ datvā balassa bhāgī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving beauty … happiness … strength … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanaṃ, gahapati, dadamāno ariyasāvako paṭiggāhakānaṃ imāni cattāri ṭhānāni detīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple gives food, they give the recipients these four things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo saññatānaṃ paradattabhojinaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Carefully giving food at the right time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālena sakkacca dadāti bhojanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to those who are disciplined, eating only what others give, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāri ṭhānāni anuppavecchati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you provide them with four things: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyuñca vaṇṇañca sukhaṃ balañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">long life, beauty, happiness, and strength. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So āyudāyī vaṇṇadāyī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who gives long life, beauty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhaṃ balaṃ dado naro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">happiness, and strength, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīghāyu yasavā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">has long life and fame </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha yatthūpapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever they’re reborn.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
