<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.028-28. Ariyavaṃsasutta  - 28. The Noble Traditions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.028. 28. Ariyavaṃsasutta  - 28. The Noble Traditions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Uruvelavagga  - 3. At Uruvelā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, ariyavaṃsā aggaññā rattaññā vaṃsaññā porāṇā asaṃkiṇṇā asaṃkiṇṇapubbā, na saṅkīyanti na saṅkīyissanti, appaṭikuṭṭhā samaṇehi brāhmaṇehi viññūhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four noble traditions are original, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now, nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena cīvarena, itarītaracīvarasantuṭṭhiyā ca vaṇṇavādī, na ca cīvarahetu anesanaṃ appatirūpaṃ āpajjati, aladdhā ca cīvaraṃ na paritassati, laddhā ca cīvaraṃ agadhito amucchito anajjhosanno ādīnavadassāvī nissaraṇapañño paribhuñjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant is content with any kind of robe, and praises such contentment. They don’t try to get hold of a robe in an improper way. They don’t get upset if they don’t get a robe. And if they do get a robe, they use it untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawback, and understanding the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāya ca pana itarītaracīvarasantuṭṭhiyā nevattānukkaṃseti, no paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t glorify themselves or put others down on account of their contentment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi tattha dakkho analaso sampajāno patissato, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu porāṇe aggaññe ariyavaṃse ṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who is deft, tireless, aware, and mindful in this is said to stand in the ancient, original noble tradition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena piṇḍapātena, itarītarapiṇḍapātasantuṭṭhiyā ca vaṇṇavādī, na ca piṇḍapātahetu anesanaṃ appatirūpaṃ āpajjati, aladdhā ca piṇḍapātaṃ na paritassati, laddhā ca piṇḍapātaṃ agadhito amucchito anajjhosanno ādīnavadassāvī nissaraṇapañño paribhuñjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of alms-food … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāya ca pana itarītarapiṇḍapātasantuṭṭhiyā nevattānukkaṃseti, no paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi tattha dakkho analaso sampajāno patissato, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu porāṇe aggaññe ariyavaṃse ṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena senāsanena, itarītarasenāsanasantuṭṭhiyā ca vaṇṇavādī, na ca senāsanahetu anesanaṃ appatirūpaṃ āpajjati, aladdhā ca senāsanaṃ na paritassati, laddhā ca senāsanaṃ agadhito amucchito anajjhosanno ādīnavadassāvī nissaraṇapañño paribhuñjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of lodgings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāya ca pana itarītarasenāsanasantuṭṭhiyā nevattānukkaṃseti, no paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi tattha dakkho analaso sampajāno patissato, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu porāṇe aggaññe ariyavaṃse ṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu bhāvanārāmo hoti bhāvanārato, pahānārāmo hoti pahānarato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant enjoys meditation and loves to meditate. They enjoy giving up and love to give up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāya ca pana bhāvanārāmatāya bhāvanāratiyā pahānārāmatāya pahānaratiyā nevattānukkaṃseti, no paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t glorify themselves or put down others on account of their love for meditation and giving up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi tattha dakkho analaso sampajāno patissato, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu porāṇe aggaññe ariyavaṃse ṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who is deft, tireless, aware, and mindful in this is said to stand in the ancient, original noble tradition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro ariyavaṃsā aggaññā rattaññā vaṃsaññā porāṇā asaṅkiṇṇā asaṅkiṇṇapubbā, na saṅkīyanti na saṅkīyissanti, appaṭikuṭṭhā samaṇehi brāhmaṇehi viññūhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four noble traditions are original, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi ca pana, bhikkhave, catūhi ariyavaṃsehi samannāgato bhikkhu puratthimāya cepi disāya viharati sveva aratiṃ sahati, na taṃ arati sahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has these four noble traditions, if they live in the east they prevail over discontent, and discontent doesn’t prevail over them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pacchimāya cepi disāya viharati sveva aratiṃ sahati, na taṃ arati sahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they live in the west … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uttarāya cepi disāya viharati sveva aratiṃ sahati, na taṃ arati sahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the north … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dakkhiṇāya cepi disāya viharati sveva aratiṃ sahati, na taṃ arati sahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the south, they prevail over discontent, and discontent doesn’t prevail over them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aratiratisaho hi, bhikkhave, dhīroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because a wise one prevails over desire and discontent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nārati sahati dhīraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dissatisfaction doesn’t prevail over a wise one; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nārati dhīraṃ sahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the wise one is not beaten by discontent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhīrova aratiṃ sahati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wise one prevails over discontent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhīro hi aratissaho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the wise one is a beater of discontent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbakammavihāyīnaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who can hold back the dispeller, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">panuṇṇaṃ ko nivāraye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s thrown away all karma? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhaṃ jambonadasseva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re like a coin of mountain gold: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko taṃ ninditumarahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who is worthy of criticizing them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devāpi naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even the gods praise them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmunāpi pasaṃsito”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and by Brahmā, too, they’re praised.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
