<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.080-80. Kambojasutta  - 80. Persia </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.080. 80. Kambojasutta  - 80. Persia </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Apaṇṇakavagga  - 8. Guaranteed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosambiyaṃ viharati ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena mātugāmo neva sabhāyaṃ nisīdati, na kammantaṃ payojeti, na kambojaṃ gacchatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why females don’t attend council meetings, work for a living, or travel to Persia?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kodhano, ānanda, mātugāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, females are irritable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">issukī, ānanda, mātugāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">jealous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maccharī, ānanda, mātugāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">stingy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duppañño, ānanda, mātugāmo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and unintelligent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ kho, ānanda, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena mātugāmo neva sabhāyaṃ nisīdati, na kammantaṃ payojeti, na kambojaṃ gacchatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why females don’t attend council meetings, work for a living, or travel to Persia.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaṇṇakavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Padhānaṃ diṭṭhisappurisa, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vadhukā dve ca honti aggāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kusināraacinteyyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dakkhiṇā ca vaṇijjā kambojanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
