<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.020-20. Bhattuddesakasutta  - 20. A Meal-allocator </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.020. 20. Bhattuddesakasutta  - 20. A Meal-allocator </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Caravagga  - 2. Walking </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a meal-allocator who has four qualities is cast down to hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandāgatiṃ gacchati, dosāgatiṃ gacchati, mohāgatiṃ gacchati, bhayāgatiṃ gacchati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A meal-allocator who has these four qualities is cast down to hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ sagge. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A meal-allocator who has four qualities is raised up to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na chandāgatiṃ gacchati, na dosāgatiṃ gacchati, na mohāgatiṃ gacchati, na bhayāgatiṃ gacchati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They make decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ saggeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A meal-allocator who has these four qualities is raised up to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci kāmesu asaññatā janā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">All those people with uncontrolled sensuality, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammikā honti adhammagāravā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">unprincipled, with no respect for principle, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandā dosā mohā ca bhayā gāmino, </span></p>
<p class="p3">led astray by favoritism, hatred, stupidity, or cowardice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisākasaṭo ca panesa vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are called ‘an assembly of the dregs’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vuttaṃ samaṇena jānatā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s what was said by the ascetic who knows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi te sappurisā pasaṃsiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so those good, praiseworthy people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme ṭhitā ye na karonti pāpakaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">standing on principle, doing nothing wrong, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na chandā na dosā na mohā na bhayā ca gāmino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not led astray by favoritism, hatred, stupidity, or cowardice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisāya maṇḍo ca panesa vuccati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">are called ‘an assembly of the cream’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vuttaṃ samaṇena jānatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s what was said by the ascetic who knows.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caravaggo dutiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caraṃ sīlaṃ padhānāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃvaraṃ paññatti pañcamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sokhummaṃ tayo agatī, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhattuddesena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
