<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.078-78. Dakkhiṇasutta  - 78. A Religious Donation </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.078. 78. Dakkhiṇasutta  - 78. A Religious Donation </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Apaṇṇakavagga  - 8. Guaranteed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catasso imā, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā visuddhiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four ways of purifying a religious donation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā catasso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā dāyakato visujjhati, no paṭiggāhakato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a religious donation that’s purified by the giver, not the recipient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā paṭiggāhakato visujjhati, no dāyakato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a religious donation that’s purified by the recipient, not the giver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā neva dāyakato visujjhati, no paṭiggāhakato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a religious donation that’s purified by neither the giver nor the recipient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā dāyakato ceva visujjhati paṭiggāhakato ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a religious donation that’s purified by both the giver and the recipient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā dāyakato visujjhati, no paṭiggāhakato? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a religious donation purified by the giver, not the recipient? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, dāyako hoti sīlavā kalyāṇadhammo; paṭiggāhakā honti dussīlā pāpadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when the giver is ethical, of good character, but the recipient is unethical, of bad character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā dāyakato visujjhati, no paṭiggāhakato. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā paṭiggāhakato visujjhati, no dāyakato? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a religious donation purified by the recipient, not the giver? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, dāyako hoti dussīlo pāpadhammo; paṭiggāhakā honti sīlavanto kalyāṇadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when the giver is unethical, of bad character, but the recipient is ethical, of good character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā paṭiggāhakato visujjhati, no dāyakato. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā neva dāyakato visujjhati, no paṭiggāhakato? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a religious donation purified by neither the giver nor the recipient? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, dāyako hoti dussīlo pāpadhammo; paṭiggāhakāpi honti dussīlā pāpadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when both the giver and the recipient are unethical, of bad character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā neva dāyakato visujjhati, no paṭiggāhakato. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā dāyakato ceva visujjhati paṭiggāhakato ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a religious donation purified by both the giver and the recipient? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, dāyako hoti sīlavā kalyāṇadhammo; paṭiggāhakāpi honti sīlavanto kalyāṇadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when both the giver and the recipient are ethical, of good character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dakkhiṇā dāyakato ceva visujjhati paṭiggāhakato ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, catasso dakkhiṇā visuddhiyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ways of purifying a religious donation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
