<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.026-26. Kuhasutta  - 26. Deceivers </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.026. 26. Kuhasutta  - 26. Deceivers </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Uruvelavagga  - 3. At Uruvelā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū kuhā thaddhā lapā siṅgī unnaḷā asamāhitā, na me te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū māmakā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those mendicants who are deceivers, stubborn, flatterers, frauds, insolent, and scattered: they are no mendicants of mine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apagatā ca te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmā dhammavinayā, na ca te imasmiṃ dhammavinaye vuddhiṃ viruḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve left this teaching and training, and they don’t achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū nikkuhā nillapā dhīrā atthaddhā susamāhitā, te kho me, bhikkhave, bhikkhū māmakā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those mendicants who are genuine, not flatterers, wise, amenable, and serene: they are mendicants of mine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anapagatā ca te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmā dhammavinayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They haven’t left this teaching and training, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca imasmiṃ dhammavinaye vuddhiṃ viruḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuhā thaddhā lapā siṅgī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who are deceivers, stubborn, flatterers, and frauds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">unnaḷā asamāhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">insolent and scattered: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na te dhamme virūhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these don’t grow in the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsambuddhadesite. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that was taught by the perfected Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikkuhā nillapā dhīrā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those who are genuine, not flatterers, wise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthaddhā susamāhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">amenable, and serene: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ve dhamme virūhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these do grow in the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsambuddhadesite”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that was taught by the perfected Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
