<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.027-27. Santuṭṭhisutta  - 27. Contentment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.027. 27. Santuṭṭhisutta  - 27. Contentment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Uruvelavagga  - 3. At Uruvelā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, appāni ca sulabhāni ca, tāni ca anavajjāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four trifles are easy to get hold of and are blameless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṃsukūlaṃ, bhikkhave, cīvarānaṃ appañca sulabhañca, tañca anavajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rag-robes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piṇḍiyālopo, bhikkhave, bhojanānaṃ appañca sulabhañca, tañca anavajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lump of alms-food … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rukkhamūlaṃ, bhikkhave, senāsanānaṃ appañca sulabhañca, tañca anavajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Lodgings at the root of a tree … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pūtimuttaṃ, bhikkhave, bhesajjānaṃ appañca sulabhañca, tañca anavajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fermented urine as medicine … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri appāni ca sulabhāni ca, tāni ca anavajjāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four trifles are easy to get hold of and are blameless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu appena ca tuṭṭho hoti sulabhena ca, idamassāhaṃ aññataraṃ sāmaññaṅganti vadāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant is content with trifles that are easy to get hold of, they have one of the factors of the ascetic life, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anavajjena tuṭṭhassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’re content with what’s blameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appena sulabhena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">trifling, and easy to get hold of, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na senāsanamārabbha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you don’t get upset </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvaraṃ pānabhojanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">about lodgings, robes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vighāto hoti cittassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">food, and drink, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">disā nappaṭihaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and you’re not obstructed anywhere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye cassa dhammā akkhātā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These qualities are said to be </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaññassānulomikā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">integral to the ascetic life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhiggahitā tuṭṭhassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re acquired by one who trains, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamattassa sikkhato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">content and diligent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
