<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.050-50. Upakkilesasutta  - 50. Corruptions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.050. 50. Upakkilesasutta  - 50. Corruptions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Rohitassavagga  - 5. With Rohitassa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, candimasūriyānaṃ upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭhā candimasūriyā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four corruptions obscure the sun and moon, so they don’t shine and glow and radiate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abbhā, bhikkhave, candimasūriyānaṃ upakkilesā, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhā candimasūriyā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Clouds … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahikā, bhikkhave, candimasūriyānaṃ upakkilesā, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhā candimasūriyā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fog … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhūmo rajo, bhikkhave, candimasūriyānaṃ upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhā candimasūriyā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smoke … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāhu, bhikkhave, asurindo candimasūriyānaṃ upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhā candimasūriyā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An eclipse of Rāhu, lord of demons … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro candimasūriyānaṃ upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭhā candimasūriyā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are four corruptions that obscure the sun and moon, so they don’t shine and glow and radiate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, cattārome samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭhā eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, these four things corrupt ascetics and brahmins, so they don’t shine and glow and radiate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā suraṃ pivanti merayaṃ, surāmerayapānā appaṭiviratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some ascetics and brahmins who drink liquor, not avoiding drinking liquor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhā eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing that corrupts ascetics and brahmins … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevanti, methunasmā dhammā appaṭiviratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some ascetics and brahmins who have sex, not avoiding sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhā eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing that corrupts ascetics and brahmins … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā jātarūparajataṃ sādiyanti, jātarūparajatapaṭiggahaṇā appaṭiviratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some ascetics and brahmins who accept gold and money, not avoiding receiving gold and money. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhā eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing that corrupts ascetics and brahmins … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā micchājīvena jīvanti, micchājīvā appaṭiviratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some ascetics and brahmins who make a living the wrong way, not avoiding wrong livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhā eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing that corrupts ascetics and brahmins … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭhā eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā na tapanti na bhāsanti na virocantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are four things that corrupt ascetics and brahmins, so they don’t shine and glow and radiate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgadosaparikkiṭṭhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some ascetics and brahmins </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are plagued by greed and hate; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjānivutā posā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">men hindered by ignorance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">piyarūpābhinandino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enjoying things that seem pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suraṃ pivanti merayaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Drinking liquor, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭisevanti methunaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">having sex, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rajataṃ jātarūpañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">accepting money and gold: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sādiyanti aviddasū; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re ignorant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchājīvena jīvanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some ascetics and brahmins </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">make a living the wrong way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete upakkilesā vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These corruptions were spoken of </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhenādiccabandhunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by the Buddha, Kinsman of the Sun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yehi upakkilesehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When corrupted by these, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">some ascetics and brahmins </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tapanti na bhāsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t shine or glow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asuddhā sarajā magā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Impure, dirty creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhakārena onaddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">shrouded in darkness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhādāsā sanettikā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">bondservants of craving, full of attachments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaḍḍhenti kaṭasiṃ ghoraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">swell the horrors of the charnel ground, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādiyanti punabbhavan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">taking up future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rohitassavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhipañhā dve kodhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rohitassāpare duve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suvidūravisākhavipallāsā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upakkilesena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamo paṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
