<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.140-140. Vādīsutta  - 140. Speaker </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.140. 140. Vādīsutta  - 140. Speaker </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Puggalavagga  - 14. Persons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, vādī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four speakers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, vādī atthato pariyādānaṃ gacchati, no byañjanato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a speaker who runs out of meaningful things to say, but not of ways of phrasing things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, vādī byañjanato pariyādānaṃ gacchati, no atthato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a speaker who runs out of ways of phrasing things, but not of meaningful things to say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, vādī atthato ca byañjanato ca pariyādānaṃ gacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a speaker who runs out of both meaningful things to say, and ways of phrasing things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, vādī nevatthato no byañjanato pariyādānaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a speaker who never runs out of meaningful things to say, or ways of phrasing things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro vādī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four speakers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ catūhi paṭisambhidāhi samannāgato atthato vā byañjanato vā pariyādānaṃ gaccheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is impossible, it cannot happen that someone accomplished in the four kinds of textual analysis will ever run out of meaningful things to say, or ways of phrasing things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalavaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojanaṃ paṭibhāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ugghaṭitaññu uṭṭhānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvajjo dve ca sīlāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nikaṭṭha dhamma vādī cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
