<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.090-90. Khandhasutta  - 90. Aggregates </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.090. 90. Khandhasutta  - 90. Aggregates </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Macalavagga  - 9. Confirmed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇamacalo, samaṇapuṇḍarīko, samaṇapadumo, samaṇesu samaṇasukhumālo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and the exquisite ascetic of ascetics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo samaṇamacalo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a confirmed ascetic? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sekho hoti appattamānaso, anuttaraṃ yogakkhemaṃ patthayamāno viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is a trainee who hasn’t achieved their heart’s desire, but lives aspiring to the supreme sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo samaṇamacalo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is a confirmed ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo samaṇapuṇḍarīko hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a white lotus ascetic? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcasu upādānakkhandhesu udayabbayānupassī viharati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iti rūpaṃ, iti rūpassa samudayo, iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saññā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saṅkhārā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti viññāṇaṃ, iti viññāṇassa samudayo, iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamo’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ca kho aṭṭha vimokkhe kāyena phusitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo samaṇapuṇḍarīko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is a white lotus ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo samaṇapadumo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a pink lotus ascetic? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcasu upādānakkhandhesu udayabbayānupassī viharati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iti rūpaṃ, iti rūpassa samudayo, iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saññā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saṅkhārā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti viññāṇaṃ, iti viññāṇassa samudayo, iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamo’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭha ca vimokkhe kāyena phusitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo samaṇapadumo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is a pink lotus ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo samaṇesu samaṇasukhumālo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person an exquisite ascetic of ascetics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yācitova bahulaṃ cīvaraṃ paribhuñjati, appaṃ ayācito … pe … mameva taṃ, bhikkhave, sammā vadamāno vadeyya samaṇesu samaṇasukhumāloti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant usually uses only what they’ve been invited to accept … And if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics, it’s me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Macalavaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipāto ca musā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avaṇṇakodhatamoṇatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Putto saṃyojanañceva, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhi khandhena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
