<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.055-55. Paṭhamasamajīvīsutta  - 55. Equality (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.055. 55. Paṭhamasamajīvīsutta  - 55. Equality (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Puññābhisandavagga  - 6. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bhaggesu viharati susumāragire bhesakaḷāvane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Bhaggas on Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā’s Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena nakulapituno gahapatissa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the householder Nakula’s father, where he sat on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho nakulapitā ca gahapati nakulamātā ca gahapatānī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho nakulapitā gahapati bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Nakula’s father and the housewife Nakula’s mother went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Nakula’s father said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato me, bhante, nakulamātā gahapatānī daharasseva daharā ānītā, nābhijānāmi nakulamātaraṃ gahapatāniṃ manasāpi aticaritā, kuto pana kāyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, ever since we were both young, and Nakula’s mother was given to me in marriage, I can’t recall betraying her even in thought, still less in deed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iccheyyāma mayaṃ, bhante, diṭṭhe ceva dhamme aññamaññaṃ passituṃ abhisamparāyañca aññamaññaṃ passitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">We want to see each other in both this life and the next.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nakulamātāpi kho gahapatānī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Nakula’s mother said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yatohaṃ, bhante, nakulapituno gahapatissa daharasseva daharā ānītā, nābhijānāmi nakulapitaraṃ gahapatiṃ manasāpi aticaritā, kuto pana kāyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, ever since we were both young, and I was given in marriage to Nakula’s father, I can’t recall betraying him even in thought, still less in deed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iccheyyāma mayaṃ, bhante, diṭṭhe ceva dhamme aññamaññaṃ passituṃ abhisamparāyañca aññamaññaṃ passitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">We want to see each other in both this life and the next.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ākaṅkheyyuñce, gahapatayo, ubho jānipatayo diṭṭhe ceva dhamme aññamaññaṃ passituṃ abhisamparāyañca aññamaññaṃ passituṃ ubhova assu samasaddhā samasīlā samacāgā samapaññā, te diṭṭhe ceva dhamme aññamaññaṃ passanti abhisamparāyañca aññamaññaṃ passantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householders, if wife and husband want to see each other in both this life and the next, they should be equals in faith, ethical conduct, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho saddhā vadaññū ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When both are faithful and kind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññatā dhammajīvino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">disciplined, living properly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te honti jānipatayo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">then wife and husband </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññaṃ piyaṃvadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">say nice things to each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthāsaṃ pacurā honti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get all the things they need, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phāsukaṃ upajāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">so they live at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amittā dummanā honti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their enemies are downhearted, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhinnaṃ samasīlinaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when both are equal in ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha dhammaṃ caritvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having practiced the teaching here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samasīlabbatā ubho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">both equal in precepts and observances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandino devalokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they delight in the heavenly realm, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">modanti kāmakāmino”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enjoying all the pleasures they desire.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
