<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.022-22. Dutiyauruvelasutta  - 22. At Uruvelā (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.022. 22. Dutiyauruvelasutta  - 22. At Uruvelā (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Uruvelavagga  - 3. At Uruvelā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ekamidāhaṃ, bhikkhave, samayaṃ uruvelāyaṃ viharāmi najjā nerañjarāya tīre ajapālanigrodhe paṭhamābhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying near Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sambahulā brāhmaṇā jiṇṇā vuddhā mahallakā addhagatā vayoanuppattā yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā mayā saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several old brahmins—elderly and senior, who were advanced in years and had reached the final stage of life—came up to me, and exchanged greetings with me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho, bhikkhave, te brāhmaṇā maṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, and said to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sutaṃ netaṃ, bho gotama: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Master Gotama, we have heard this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na samaṇo gotamo brāhmaṇe jiṇṇe vuddhe mahallake addhagate vayoanuppatte abhivādeti vā paccuṭṭheti vā āsanena vā nimantetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayidaṃ, bho gotama, tatheva. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is indeed the case, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi bhavaṃ gotamo brāhmaṇe jiṇṇe vuddhe mahallake addhagate vayoanuppatte abhivādeti vā paccuṭṭheti vā āsanena vā nimanteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for Master Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayidaṃ, bho gotama, na sampannamevā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is not appropriate, Master Gotama.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nayime āyasmanto jānanti theraṃ vā therakaraṇe vā dhamme’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘These venerables don’t know what a senior is, or what qualities make you a senior.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuddho cepi, bhikkhave, hoti āsītiko vā nāvutiko vā vassasatiko vā jātiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, suppose you’re eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca hoti akālavādī abhūtavādī anatthavādī adhammavādī avinayavādī, anidhānavatiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā akālena anapadesaṃ apariyantavatiṃ anatthasaṃhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But your speech is untimely, false, meaningless, and against the teaching or training. You say things at the wrong time which are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so ‘bālo thero’tveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then you’ll be considered a ‘childish senior’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharo cepi, bhikkhave, hoti yuvā susukāḷakeso bhadrena yobbanena samannāgato paṭhamena vayasā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now suppose you’re a youth, young, black-haired, blessed with youth, in the prime of life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca hoti kālavādī bhūtavādī atthavādī dhammavādī vinayavādī nidhānavatiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā kālena sāpadesaṃ pariyantavatiṃ atthasaṃhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But your speech is timely, true, meaningful, and in line with the teaching and training. You say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so ‘paṇḍito thero’tveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then you’ll be considered an ‘astute senior’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārome, bhikkhave, therakaraṇā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these four qualities that make a senior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā, diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro therakaraṇā dhammāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four qualities that make a senior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo uddhatena cittena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The creature with a restless mind </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samphañca bahu bhāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">speaks a lot of nonsense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asamāhitasaṅkappo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their thoughts are unsettled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaddhammarato mago; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they don’t like the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārā so thāvareyyamhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re far from seniority, with their bad views </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpadiṭṭhi anādaro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their lack of regard for others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca sīlena sampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But one accomplished in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sutavā paṭibhānavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">learned and eloquent, that wise one </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññato dhīro dhammesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is restrained when experiencing phenomena, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāyatthaṃ vipassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">discerning the meaning with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāragū sabbadhammānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gone beyond all things, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akhilo paṭibhānavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">kind, eloquent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahīnajātimaraṇo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve given up birth and death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacariyassa kevalī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and have completed the spiritual journey. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamahaṃ vadāmi theroti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s who I call a senior, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa no santi āsavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has no defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsavānaṃ khayā bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of defilements, a mendicant </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so theroti pavuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is declared a ‘senior’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
