<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.254-254. Abhiññāsutta  - 254. Insight </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.254. 254. Abhiññāsutta  - 254. Insight </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">26. Abhiññāvagga  - 26. Insight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, there are these four things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pariññeyyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pahātabbā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that should be given up by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā bhāvetabbā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that should be developed by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā sacchikātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that should be realized by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pariññeyyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcupādānakkhandhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pariññeyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pahātabbā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjā ca bhavataṇhā ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance and craving for continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pahātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that should be given up by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā bhāvetabbā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samatho ca vipassanā ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Serenity and discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that should be developed by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā sacchikātabbā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjā ca vimutti ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge and freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā sacchikātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that should be realized by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro dhammā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
