<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.048-48. Visākhasutta  - 48. With Visākha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.048. 48. Visākhasutta  - 48. With Visākha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Rohitassavagga  - 5. With Rohitassa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā visākho pañcālaputto upaṭṭhānasālāyaṃ bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti, poriyā vācāya vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā pariyāpannāya anissitāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli’s son, was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk. His words were polished, clear, articulate, expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena upaṭṭhānasālā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the assembly hall. He sat down on the seat spread out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko nu kho, bhikkhave, upaṭṭhānasālāyaṃ bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti poriyā vācāya vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā pariyāpannāya anissitāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, who was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āyasmā, bhante, visākho pañcālaputto upaṭṭhānasālāyaṃ bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti poriyā vācāya vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā pariyāpannāya anissitāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, it was Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli’s son.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ visākhaṃ pañcālaputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Visākha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu sādhu, visākha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Visākha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho tvaṃ, visākha, bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṃsesi poriyā vācāya vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā pariyāpannāya anissitāyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good that you educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk, with words that are polished, clear, articulate, expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nābhāsamānaṃ jānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Though an astute person is mixed up with fools, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">missaṃ bālehi paṇḍitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t know unless he speaks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsamānañca jānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when he speaks they know, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">desentaṃ amataṃ padaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’s teaching the deathless state. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsaye jotaye dhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He should speak and illustrate the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paggaṇhe isinaṃ dhajaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">holding up the banner of the hermits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Subhāsitadhajā isayo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Words well spoken are the hermits’ banner, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammo hi isinaṃ dhajo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the teaching is the banner of the hermits.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
