<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.196-196. Sāḷhasutta  - 196. With Sāḷha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.196. 196. Sāḷhasutta  - 196. With Sāḷha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Mahāvagga  - 20. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāḷho ca licchavi abhayo ca licchavi yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho sāḷho licchavi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sāḷha and Abhaya the Licchavis went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Santi, bhante, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā dvayena oghassa nittharaṇaṃ paññapenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, sir, some ascetics and brahmins who advocate crossing the flood by means of two things: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlavisuddhihetu ca tapojigucchāhetu ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">purification of ethics, and mortification in disgust of sin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhante, bhagavā kimāhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does the Buddha say about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sīlavisuddhiṃ kho ahaṃ, sāḷha, aññataraṃ sāmaññaṅganti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sāḷha, purification of ethics is one of the factors of the ascetic life, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te, sāḷha, samaṇabrāhmaṇā tapojigucchāvādā tapojigucchāsārā tapojigucchāallīnā viharanti, abhabbā te oghassa nittharaṇāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those ascetics and brahmins who teach mortification in disgust of sin—regarding it as essential and clinging to it—are incapable of crossing the flood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, sāḷha, samaṇabrāhmaṇā aparisuddhakāyasamācārā aparisuddhavacīsamācārā aparisuddhamanosamācārā aparisuddhājīvā, abhabbā te ñāṇadassanāya anuttarāya sambodhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those ascetics and brahmins whose behavior by way of body, speech, and mind is not pure are also incapable of knowing and seeing, of supreme awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, sāḷha, puriso nadiṃ taritukāmo tiṇhaṃ kuṭhāriṃ ādāya vanaṃ paviseyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a man who wanted to cross a river took a sharp axe into a wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha passeyya mahatiṃ sālalaṭṭhiṃ ujuṃ navaṃ akukkuccakajātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There he’d see a large green sal tree, straight and young and grown free of defects. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ mūle chindeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’d cut it down at the base, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mūle chetvā agge chindeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">cut off the top, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">agge chetvā sākhāpalāsaṃ suvisodhitaṃ visodheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and completely strip off the branches and foliage. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sākhāpalāsaṃ suvisodhitaṃ visodhetvā kuṭhārīhi taccheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he’d trim it with axes and </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuṭhārīhi tacchetvā vāsīhi taccheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">machetes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsīhi tacchetvā lekhaṇiyā likheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">plane it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lekhaṇiyā likhitvā pāsāṇaguḷena dhoveyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sand it with a rock. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāsāṇaguḷena dhovetvā nadiṃ patāreyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Finally, he’d launch out on the river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sāḷha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Sāḷha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhabbo nu kho so puriso nadiṃ taritun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is that man capable of crossing the river?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kissa hetu”? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why not? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Asu hi, bhante, sālalaṭṭhi bahiddhā suparikammakatā anto avisuddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because that green sal tree is well worked on the outside, but inside it’s still not cleared out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassetaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—sālalaṭṭhi saṃsīdissati, puriso anayabyasanaṃ āpajjissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’d expect that green sal tree to sink, and the man to come to ruin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamevaṃ kho, sāḷha, ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā tapojigucchāvādā tapojigucchāsārā tapojigucchāallīnā viharanti, abhabbā te oghassa nittharaṇāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, Sāḷha, those ascetics and brahmins who teach mortification in disgust of sin—regarding it as essential and clinging to it—are incapable of crossing the flood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, sāḷha, samaṇabrāhmaṇā aparisuddhakāyasamācārā aparisuddhavacīsamācārā aparisuddhamanosamācārā aparisuddhājīvā, abhabbā te ñāṇadassanāya anuttarāya sambodhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those ascetics and brahmins whose behavior by way of body, speech, and mind is not pure are also incapable of knowing and seeing, of supreme awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho te, sāḷha, samaṇabrāhmaṇā na tapojigucchāvādā na tapojigucchāsārā na tapojigucchāallīnā viharanti, bhabbā te oghassa nittharaṇāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those ascetics and brahmins who don’t teach mortification in disgust of sin—not regarding it as essential or clinging to it—are capable of crossing the flood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, sāḷha, samaṇabrāhmaṇā parisuddhakāyasamācārā parisuddhavacīsamācārā parisuddhamanosamācārā parisuddhājīvā, bhabbā te ñāṇadassanāya anuttarāya sambodhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those ascetics and brahmins whose behavior by way of body, speech, and mind is pure are also capable of knowing and seeing, of supreme awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, sāḷha, puriso nadiṃ taritukāmo tiṇhaṃ kuṭhāriṃ ādāya vanaṃ paviseyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a man who wanted to cross a river took a sharp axe into a wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha passeyya mahatiṃ sālalaṭṭhiṃ ujuṃ navaṃ akukkuccakajātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There he’d see a large green sal tree, straight and young and grown free of defects. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ mūle chindeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’d cut it down at the base, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mūle chinditvā agge chindeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">cut off the top, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">agge chinditvā sākhāpalāsaṃ suvisodhitaṃ visodheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and completely strip off the branches and foliage. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sākhāpalāsaṃ suvisodhitaṃ visodhetvā kuṭhārīhi taccheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he’d trim it with axes and </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuṭhārīhi tacchetvā vāsīhi taccheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">machetes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsīhi tacchetvā nikhādanaṃ ādāya anto suvisodhitaṃ visodheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he’d take a chisel and completely clear it out inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anto suvisodhitaṃ visodhetvā lekhaṇiyā likheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he’d plane it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lekhaṇiyā likhitvā pāsāṇaguḷena dhoveyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">sand it with a rock, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāsāṇaguḷena dhovetvā nāvaṃ kareyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and make it into a boat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāvaṃ katvā phiyārittaṃ bandheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Finally he’d fix it with oars and rudder, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phiyārittaṃ bandhitvā nadiṃ patāreyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and launch out on the river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sāḷha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Sāḷha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhabbo nu kho so puriso nadiṃ taritun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is that man capable of crossing the river?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kissa hetu”? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Asu hi, bhante, sālalaṭṭhi bahiddhā suparikammakatā, anto suvisuddhā nāvākatā phiyārittabaddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because that green sal tree is well worked on the outside, cleared out on the inside, made into a boat, and fixed with oars and rudder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassetaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’d expect </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāvā na saṃsīdissati, puriso sotthinā pāraṃ gamissatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that boat to not sink, and the man to safely make it to the far shore.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamevaṃ kho, sāḷha, ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā na tapojigucchāvādā na tapojigucchāsārā na tapojigucchāallīnā viharanti, bhabbā te oghassa nittharaṇāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, Sāḷha, those ascetics and brahmins who don’t teach mortification in disgust of sin—not regarding it as essential or clinging to it—are capable of crossing the flood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, sāḷha, samaṇabrāhmaṇā parisuddhakāyasamācārā parisuddhavacīsamācārā parisuddhamanosamācārā parisuddhājīvā, bhabbā te ñāṇadassanāya anuttarāya sambodhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those ascetics and brahmins whose behavior by way of body, speech, and mind is pure are also capable of knowing and seeing, of supreme awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, sāḷha, yodhājīvo bahūni cepi kaṇḍacitrakāni jānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a warrior who knew lots of fancy archery tricks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho so tīhi ṭhānehi rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅganteva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is only with these three factors that he becomes worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dūrepātī ca, akkhaṇavedhī ca, mahato ca kāyassa padāletā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s a long-distance shooter, a marksman, and one who shatters large objects. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, sāḷha, yodhājīvo dūrepātī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a warrior is a long-distance shooter, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, sāḷha, ariyasāvako sammāsamādhi hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble disciple has right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsamādhi, sāḷha, ariyasāvako yaṃ kiñci rūpaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā sabbaṃ rūpaṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with right immersion truly sees any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly see any kind of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā, sabbaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, *all* consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, sāḷha, yodhājīvo akkhaṇavedhī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a warrior is a marksman, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, sāḷha, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble disciple has right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhi, sāḷha, ariyasāvako ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with right view truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, sāḷha, yodhājīvo mahato kāyassa padāletā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a warrior shatters large objects, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, sāḷha, ariyasāvako sammāvimutti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble disciple has right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāvimutti, sāḷha, ariyasāvako mahantaṃ avijjākkhandhaṃ padāletī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with right freedom shatters the great mass of ignorance.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
