<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.111-111. Kesisutta  - 111. With Kesi </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.111. 111. Kesisutta  - 111. With Kesi </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Kesivagga  - 12. With Kesi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kesi assadammasārathi yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho kesiṃ assadammasārathiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Kesi the horse trainer went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tvaṃ khosi, kesi, paññāto assadammasārathīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kesi, you’re known as a horse trainer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ pana tvaṃ, kesi, assadammaṃ vinesī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just how do you guide a horse in training?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahaṃ kho, bhante, assadammaṃ saṇhenapi vinemi, pharusenapi vinemi, saṇhapharusenapi vinemī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I guide a horse in training sometimes gently, sometimes harshly, and sometimes both gently and harshly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace te, kesi, assadammo saṇhena vinayaṃ na upeti, pharusena vinayaṃ na upeti, saṇhapharusena vinayaṃ na upeti, kinti naṃ karosī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kesi, what do you do with a horse in training that doesn’t follow these forms of training?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace me, bhante, assadammo saṇhena vinayaṃ na upeti, pharusena vinayaṃ na upeti, saṇhapharusena vinayaṃ na upeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hanāmi naṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, sir, I kill it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mā me ācariyakulassa avaṇṇo ahosī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that I don’t disgrace my profession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā pana, bhante, anuttaro purisadammasārathi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But sir, the Buddha is the supreme guide for those who wish to train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ pana, bhante, bhagavā purisadammaṃ vinetī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just how do you guide a person in training?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahaṃ kho, kesi, purisadammaṃ saṇhenapi vinemi, pharusenapi vinemi, saṇhapharusenapi vinemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kesi, I guide a person in training sometimes gently, sometimes harshly, and sometimes both gently and harshly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ, kesi, saṇhasmiṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The gentle way is this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti kāyasucaritaṃ iti kāyasucaritassa vipāko, iti vacīsucaritaṃ iti vacīsucaritassa vipāko, iti manosucaritaṃ iti manosucaritassa vipāko, iti devā, iti manussāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. This is the result of good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. This is life as a god. This is life as a human.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ, kesi, pharusasmiṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The harsh way is this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti kāyaduccaritaṃ iti kāyaduccaritassa vipāko, iti vacīduccaritaṃ iti vacīduccaritassa vipāko, iti manoduccaritaṃ iti manoduccaritassa vipāko, iti nirayo, iti tiracchānayoni, iti pettivisayoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. This is the result of bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. This is life in hell. This is life as an animal. This is life as a ghost.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ, kesi, saṇhapharusasmiṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The both gentle and harsh way is this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti kāyasucaritaṃ iti kāyasucaritassa vipāko, iti kāyaduccaritaṃ iti kāyaduccaritassa vipāko, iti vacīsucaritaṃ iti vacīsucaritassa vipāko, iti vacīduccaritaṃ iti vacīduccaritassa vipāko, iti manosucaritaṃ iti manosucaritassa vipāko, iti manoduccaritaṃ iti manoduccaritassa vipāko, iti devā, iti manussā, iti nirayo, iti tiracchānayoni, iti pettivisayo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is good conduct … this is bad conduct …’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace te, bhante, purisadammo saṇhena vinayaṃ na upeti, pharusena vinayaṃ na upeti, saṇhapharusena vinayaṃ na upeti, kinti naṃ bhagavā karotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what do you do with a person in training who doesn’t follow these forms of training?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace me, kesi, purisadammo saṇhena vinayaṃ na upeti, pharusena vinayaṃ na upeti, saṇhapharusena vinayaṃ na upeti, hanāmi naṃ, kesī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, Kesi, I kill them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, bhante, bhagavato pāṇātipāto kappati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, it’s not appropriate for the Buddha to kill living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ca pana bhagavā evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And yet you say </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘hanāmi naṃ, kesī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you kill them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṃ, kesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Kesi, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tathāgatassa pāṇātipāto kappati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s not appropriate for a Realized One to kill living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca yo purisadammo saṇhena vinayaṃ na upeti, pharusena vinayaṃ na upeti, saṇhapharusena vinayaṃ na upeti, na taṃ tathāgato vattabbaṃ anusāsitabbaṃ maññati, nāpi viññū sabrahmacārī vattabbaṃ anusāsitabbaṃ maññanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when a person in training doesn’t follow any of these forms of training, the Realized One doesn’t think they’re worth advising or instructing, and neither do their sensible spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vadho heso, kesi, ariyassa vinaye—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For it is death in the training of the noble one </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ na tathāgato vattabbaṃ anusāsitabbaṃ maññati, nāpi viññū sabrahmacārī vattabbaṃ anusāsitabbaṃ maññantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the Realized One doesn’t think they’re worth advising or instructing, and neither do their sensible spiritual companions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“So hi nūna, bhante, suhato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, they’re definitely dead </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ na tathāgato vattabbaṃ anusāsitabbaṃ maññati, nāpi viññū sabrahmacārī vattabbaṃ anusāsitabbaṃ maññantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the Realized One doesn’t think they’re worth advising or instructing, and neither do their sensible spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkantaṃ, bhante, abhikkantaṃ, bhante … pe … upāsakaṃ maṃ, bhante, bhagavā dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, sir! … From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
