<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.069-69. Padhānasutta  - 69. Effort </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.069. 69. Padhānasutta  - 69. Effort </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Pattakammavagga  - 7. Deeds of Substance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, padhānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃvarappadhānaṃ, pahānappadhānaṃ, bhāvanāppadhānaṃ, anurakkhaṇāppadhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The efforts to restrain, to give up, to develop, and to preserve. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, saṃvarappadhānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what, mendicants, is the effort to restrain? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ anuppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, saṃvarappadhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the effort to restrain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, pahānappadhānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what, mendicants, is the effort to give up? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu uppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pahānappadhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the effort to give up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, bhāvanāppadhānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what, mendicants, is the effort to develop? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anuppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhāvanāppadhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the effort to develop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, anurakkhaṇāppadhānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what, mendicants, is the effort to preserve? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, anurakkhaṇāppadhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the effort to preserve. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri padhānānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃvaro ca pahānañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Restraint and giving up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhāvanā anurakkhaṇā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">development and preservation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete padhānā cattāro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these are the four efforts </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">desitādiccabandhunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">taught by the Kinsman of the Sun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi bhikkhu idhātāpī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any mendicant who keenly applies these </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khayaṃ dukkhassa pāpuṇe”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">may attain the ending of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
