<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.038-38. Patilīnasutta  - 38. Withdrawn </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.038. 38. Patilīnasutta  - 38. Withdrawn </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Cakkavagga  - 4. Situations </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Panuṇṇapaccekasacco, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘samavayasaṭṭhesano passaddhakāyasaṅkhāro patilīno’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has stilled the physical process, and is said to be ‘withdrawn’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu panuṇṇapaccekasacco hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno yāni tāni puthusamaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ puthupaccekasaccāni, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth. For example: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sassato lokoti vā, asassato lokoti vā, antavā lokoti vā, anantavā lokoti vā, taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīranti vā, aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīranti vā, hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, hoti ca na ca hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, neva hoti na na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the world is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are the same thing, or they are different things; after death, a Realized One exists, or doesn’t exist, or both exists and doesn’t exist, or neither exists nor doesn’t exist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbāni tāni nuṇṇāni honti panuṇṇāni cattāni vantāni muttāni pahīnāni paṭinissaṭṭhāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant has dispelled, eliminated, thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu panuṇṇapaccekasacco hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu samavayasaṭṭhesano hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno kāmesanā pahīnā hoti, bhavesanā pahīnā hoti, brahmacariyesanā paṭippassaddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when they’ve given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and for a spiritual path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu samavayasaṭṭhesano hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has totally given up searching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu passaddhakāyasaṅkhāro hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu passaddhakāyasaṅkhāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has stilled the physical process. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu patilīno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant withdrawn? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno asmimāno pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when they’ve given up the conceit ‘I am’, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu patilīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is withdrawn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Panuṇṇapaccekasacco, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘samavayasaṭṭhesano passaddhakāyasaṅkhāro patilīno’ti vuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has stilled the physical process, and is said to be ‘withdrawn’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmesanā bhavesanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The search for sensual pleasures, for a good rebirth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacariyesanā saha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">together with the search for a spiritual path; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti saccaparāmāso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">holding tight to the notion ‘this is the truth’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhiṭṭhānā samussayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the mass of grounds for views. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbarāgavirattassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one detached from all lusts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhakkhayavimuttino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">freed by the ending of craving, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esanā paṭinissaṭṭhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">searching has been relinquished, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhiṭṭhānā samūhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and viewpoints eradicated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve santo sato bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That mendicant is peaceful and mindful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passaddho aparājito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a tranquil champion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mānābhisamayā buddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when they’re awakened by comprehending conceit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">patilīnoti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called ‘withdrawn’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
