<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.118-118. Saṃvejanīyasutta  - 118. Inspiring </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.118. 118. Saṃvejanīyasutta  - 118. Inspiring </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Kesivagga  - 12. With Kesi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, saddhassa kulaputtassa dassanīyāni saṃvejanīyāni ṭhānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a faithful gentleman should go to see these four inspiring places. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idha tathāgato jāto’ti, bhikkhave, saddhassa kulaputtassa dassanīyaṃ saṃvejanīyaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking: ‘Here the Realized One was born!’—that is an inspiring place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idha tathāgato anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho’ti, bhikkhave, saddhassa kulaputtassa dassanīyaṃ saṃvejanīyaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking: ‘Here the Realized One became awakened as a supreme fully awakened Buddha!’—that is an inspiring place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idha tathāgato anuttaraṃ dhammacakkaṃ pavattesī’ti, bhikkhave, saddhassa kulaputtassa dassanīyaṃ saṃvejanīyaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking: ‘Here the Realized One rolled forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma!’—that is an inspiring place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idha tathāgato anupādisesāya nibbānadhātuyā parinibbuto’ti, bhikkhave, saddhassa kulaputtassa dassanīyaṃ saṃvejanīyaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking: ‘Here the Realized One became fully extinguished through the natural principle of extinguishment, without anything left over!’—that is an inspiring place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri saddhassa kulaputtassa dassanīyāni saṃvejanīyāni ṭhānānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four inspiring places that a faithful gentleman should go to see.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
