<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.179-179. Nibbānasutta  - 179. Extinguishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.179. 179. Nibbānasutta  - 179. Extinguishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Sañcetaniyavagga  - 18. Intention </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, Ānanda sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, hetu ko paccayo, yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme na parinibbāyantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, Reverend Sāriputta, what is the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso ānanda, sattā imā hānabhāgiyā saññāti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, imā ṭhitibhāgiyā saññāti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, imā visesabhāgiyā saññāti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, imā nibbedhabhāgiyā saññāti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Ānanda, it’s because some sentient beings don’t really understand which perceptions make things worse, which keep things steady, which lead to distinction, and which lead to penetration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso ānanda, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme na parinibbāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko panāvuso sāriputta, hetu ko paccayo, yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, Reverend Sāriputta, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso ānanda, sattā imā hānabhāgiyā saññāti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, imā ṭhitibhāgiyā saññāti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, imā visesabhāgiyā saññāti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, imā nibbedhabhāgiyā saññāti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Ānanda, it’s because some sentient beings truly understand which perceptions make things worse, which keep things steady, which lead to distinction, and which lead to penetration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso ānanda, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
