<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.189-189. Sacchikaraṇīyasutta  - 189. Things to be Realized </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.189. 189. Sacchikaraṇīyasutta  - 189. Things to be Realized </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 19. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, sacchikaraṇīyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four things should be realized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā kāyena sacchikaraṇīyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things to be realized directly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā satiyā sacchikaraṇīyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things to be realized with mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā cakkhunā sacchikaraṇīyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things to be realized with vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā paññāya sacchikaraṇīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things to be realized with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā kāyena sacchikaraṇīyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What things are to be realized directly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭha vimokkhā, bhikkhave, kāyena sacchikaraṇīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eight liberations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā satiyā sacchikaraṇīyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What things are to be realized with mindfulness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbenivāso, bhikkhave, satiyā sacchikaraṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Past lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā cakkhunā sacchikaraṇīyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What things are to be realized with vision? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattānaṃ cutūpapāto, bhikkhave, cakkhunā sacchikaraṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The passing away and rebirth of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā paññāya sacchikaraṇīyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What things are to be realized with wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsavānaṃ khayo, bhikkhave, paññāya sacchikaraṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro sacchikaraṇīyā dhammā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four things to be realized.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
