<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.262-262. Araññasutta  - 262. Wilderness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.262. 262. Araññasutta  - 262. Wilderness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">26. Abhiññāvagga  - 26. Insight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nālaṃ araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a mendicant has four qualities they’re not ready to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmavitakkena, byāpādavitakkena, vihiṃsāvitakkena, duppañño hoti jaḷo elamūgo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They have sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts; or they’re witless, dull, and stupid. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nālaṃ araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has these four qualities they’re not ready to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu alaṃ araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has four qualities they’re ready to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhammavitakkena, abyāpādavitakkena, avihiṃsāvitakkena, paññavā hoti ajaḷo anelamūgo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They have thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness; and they’re wise, bright, and clever. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu alaṃ araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has these four qualities they’re ready to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
