<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.039-39. Ujjayasutta  - 39. With Ujjaya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.039. 39. Ujjayasutta  - 39. With Ujjaya </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Cakkavagga  - 4. Situations </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho ujjayo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Ujjaya the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho ujjayo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhavampi no gotamo yaññaṃ vaṇṇetī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Does Master Gotama praise sacrifice?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, sabbaṃ yaññaṃ vaṇṇemi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, I don’t praise all sacrifices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na panāhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, sabbaṃ yaññaṃ na vaṇṇemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor do I criticize all sacrifices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpe kho, brāhmaṇa, yaññe gāvo haññanti, ajeḷakā haññanti, kukkuṭasūkarā haññanti, vividhā pāṇā saṅghātaṃ āpajjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are slaughtered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evarūpaṃ kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, sārambhaṃ yaññaṃ na vaṇṇemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I criticize that kind of violent sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpañhi, brāhmaṇa, sārambhaṃ yaññaṃ na upasaṅkamanti arahanto vā arahattamaggaṃ vā samāpannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because neither perfected ones nor those who have entered the path to perfection will attend such a violent sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpe ca kho, brāhmaṇa, yaññe neva gāvo haññanti, na ajeḷakā haññanti, na kukkuṭasūkarā haññanti, na vividhā pāṇā saṅghātaṃ āpajjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are not slaughtered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evarūpaṃ kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, nirārambhaṃ yaññaṃ vaṇṇemi, yadidaṃ niccadānaṃ anukulayaññaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I praise that kind of non-violent sacrifice; for example, a regular gift as an ongoing family sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpañhi, brāhmaṇa, nirārambhaṃ yaññaṃ upasaṅkamanti arahanto vā arahattamaggaṃ vā samāpannāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because perfected ones and those who have entered the path to perfection will attend such a non-violent sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assamedhaṃ purisamedhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Horse sacrifice, human sacrifice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāpāsaṃ vājapeyyaṃ niraggaḷaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the sacrifices of the ‘stick-casting’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāyaññā mahārambhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the ‘royal soma drinking’, and the ‘unbarred’—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na te honti mahapphalā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">these huge violent sacrifices yield no great fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajeḷakā ca gāvo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The great sages of good conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vividhā yattha haññare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t attend sacrifices </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na taṃ sammaggatā yaññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">where goats, sheep, and cattle, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upayanti mahesino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and various creatures are killed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca yaññā nirārambhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the great sages of good conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yajanti anukulaṃ sadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">do attend non-violent sacrifices </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajeḷakā ca gāvo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">of regular family tradition, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vividhā nettha haññare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where goats, sheep, and cattle, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañca sammaggatā yaññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and various creatures aren’t killed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upayanti mahesino. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ yajetha medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An intelligent person should sacrifice like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eso yañño mahapphalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for this sacrifice is very fruitful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ hi yajamānassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a sponsor of sacrifices like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyo hoti na pāpiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">things get better, not worse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañño ca vipulo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a sacrifice is truly abundant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasīdanti ca devatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and even the deities are pleased.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
