<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.044-44. Dutiyakodhagarusutta  - 44. Valuing Anger (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.044. 44. Dutiyakodhagarusutta  - 44. Valuing Anger (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Rohitassavagga  - 5. With Rohitassa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, asaddhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four things oppose the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhagarutā na saddhammagarutā, makkhagarutā na saddhammagarutā, lābhagarutā na saddhammagarutā, sakkāragarutā na saddhammagarutā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Valuing anger, denigration, material possessions, and honor rather than the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro asaddhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four things that oppose the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārome, bhikkhave, saddhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four things are the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhammagarutā na kodhagarutā, saddhammagarutā na makkhagarutā, saddhammagarutā na lābhagarutā, saddhammagarutā na sakkāragarutā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Valuing the true teaching rather than anger, denigration, material possessions, and honor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro saddhammāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four things that are the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhamakkhagaru bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who values anger and denigration, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lābhasakkāragāravo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">possessions and honor, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhette pūtibījaṃva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">doesn’t grow in the true teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhamme na virūhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a rotten seed in a good field. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca saddhammagaruno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those who value the true teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vihaṃsu viharanti ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who have lived it, and are living it now, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ve dhamme virūhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these do grow in the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">snehānvayamivosadhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like well-watered herbs.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
