<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.007-7. Sobhanasutta  - 7. Beautification </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.007. 7. Sobhanasutta  - 7. Beautification </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhaṇḍagāmavagga  - 1. At Bhaṇḍa Village </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, viyattā vinītā visāradā bahussutā dhammadharā dhammānudhammappaṭipannā saṃghaṃ sobhenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four competent, educated, assured, learned people—who have memorized the teachings and practice in line with the teachings—beautify the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu, bhikkhave, viyatto vinīto visārado bahussuto dhammadharo dhammānudhammappaṭipanno saṃghaṃ sobheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī, bhikkhave, viyattā vinītā visāradā bahussutā dhammadharā dhammānudhammappaṭipannā saṃghaṃ sobheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsako, bhikkhave, viyatto vinīto visārado bahussuto dhammadharo dhammānudhammappaṭipanno saṃghaṃ sobheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a layman, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsikā, bhikkhave, viyattā vinītā visāradā bahussutā dhammadharā dhammānudhammappaṭipannā saṃghaṃ sobheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a laywoman. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro viyattā vinītā visāradā bahussutā dhammadharā dhammānudhammappaṭipannā saṃghaṃ sobhentīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four competent, educated, assured, learned people—who have memorized the teachings and practice in line with the teachings—beautify the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hoti viyatto ca visārado ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever is competent and assured, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahussuto dhammadharo ca hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">learned, a memorizer of the teachings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammassa hoti anudhammacārī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who lives in line with the teachings—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa tādiso vuccati saṃghasobhano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">such a person is said to beautify the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca sīlasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk accomplished in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunī ca bahussutā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a learned nun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsako ca yo saddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a faithful layman, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā ca saddhā upāsikā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a faithful laywoman, too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete kho saṅghaṃ sobhenti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these beautify the Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ete hi saṅghasobhanā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they are the beautifiers of the Saṅgha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
