<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.190-190. Uposathasutta  - 190. Sabbath </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.190. 190. Uposathasutta  - 190. Sabbath </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 19. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā tadahuposathe bhikkhusaṃghaparivuto nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time it was the sabbath, and the Buddha was sitting surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tuṇhībhūtaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ bhikkhusaṃghaṃ anuviloketvā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of monks, who were so very silent. He addressed them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Apalāpāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā nippalāpāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā suddhā sāre patiṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This assembly has no nonsense, mendicants, it’s free of nonsense. It consists purely of the essential core. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathārūpo ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhusaṃgho, tathārūpāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is this Saṅgha of monks, such is this assembly! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpā parisā dullabhā dassanāyapi lokasmiṃ, tathārūpo ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhusaṃgho, tathārūpāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly such as this is rarely seen in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpā parisā āhuneyyā pāhuneyyā dakkhiṇeyyā añjalikaraṇīyā anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa, tathārūpo ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhusaṃgho, tathārūpāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly such as this is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpāya parisāya appaṃ dinnaṃ bahu hoti bahu dinnaṃ bahutaraṃ, tathārūpo ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhusaṃgho, tathārūpāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even a small gift to an assembly such as this is plentiful, while giving more is even more plentiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpaṃ parisaṃ alaṃ yojanagaṇanānipi dassanāya gantuṃ api puṭosenāpi, tathārūpo ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhusaṃgho, tathārūpāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly such as this is worth traveling many leagues to see, even if you have to carry your own provisions in a shoulder bag. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe devappattā viharanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are monks staying in this Saṅgha who have attained to the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe brahmappattā viharanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are monks staying in this Saṅgha who have attained to Brahmā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe āneñjappattā viharanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are monks staying in this Saṅgha who have attained to the imperturbable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe ariyappattā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are monks staying in this Saṅgha who have attained to nobility. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu devappatto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a monk attained to the gods? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi … pe … paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a monk, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā … pe … dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ … pe … tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu devappatto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a monk has attained to the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu brahmappatto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a monk attained to Brahmā? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mettāsahagatena cetasā ekaṃ disaṃ pharitvā viharati, tathā dutiyaṃ tathā tatiyaṃ tathā catutthaṃ. Iti uddhamadho tiriyaṃ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena pharitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a monk meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karuṇā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a monk meditates spreading a heart full of compassion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muditā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">rejoicing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsahagatena cetasā ekaṃ disaṃ pharitvā viharati, tathā dutiyaṃ tathā tatiyaṃ tathā catutthaṃ. Iti uddhamadho tiriyaṃ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ upekkhāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena pharitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu brahmappatto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a monk has attained to Brahmā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āneñjappatto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a monk attained to the imperturbable? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sabbaso rūpasaññānaṃ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānaṃ atthaṅgamā nānattasaññānaṃ amanasikārā ‘ananto ākāso’ti ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a monk—going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity—aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘anantaṃ viññāṇan’ti viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, he enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘natthi kiñcī’ti ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, he enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, he enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āneñjappatto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a monk has attained to the imperturbable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyappatto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a monk attained to nobility? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when they truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyappatto hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a monk has attained to nobility.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brāhmaṇavaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yodhā pāṭibhogasutaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhayaṃ brāhmaṇasaccena pañcamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ummaggavassakāro, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upako sacchikiriyā ca uposathoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
