<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.207-207. Paṭhamapāpadhammasutta  - 207. Bad Character (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.207. 207. Paṭhamapāpadhammasutta  - 207. Bad Character (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Sappurisavagga  - 21. A Good Person </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pāpañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, pāpena pāpatarañca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you who’s bad and who’s worse, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇañca, kalyāṇena kalyāṇatarañca. Taṃ suṇātha … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s good and who’s better. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pāpo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who’s bad? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātī hoti … pe … micchādiṭṭhiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called bad. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pāpena pāpataro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who’s worse? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco attanā ca pāṇātipātī hoti, parañca pāṇātipāte samādapeti … pe … attanā ca micchādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca micchādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view. And they encourage others to do these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpena pāpataro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called worse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kalyāṇo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who’s good? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti … pe … sammādiṭṭhiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re contented, kind-hearted, with right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kalyāṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kalyāṇena kalyāṇataro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who’s better? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco attanā ca pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, parañca pāṇātipātā veramaṇiyā samādapeti … pe … attanā ca sammādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca sammādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They’re contented, kind-hearted, with right view. And they encourage others to do these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kalyāṇena kalyāṇataro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called better.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
