<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.063-63. Brahmasutta  - 63. Living with Brahmā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.063. 63. Brahmasutta  - 63. Living with Brahmā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Pattakammavagga  - 7. Deeds of Substance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sabrahmakāni, bhikkhave, tāni kulāni yesaṃ puttānaṃ mātāpitaro ajjhāgāre pūjitā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with Brahmā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sapubbācariyakāni, bhikkhave, tāni kulāni, yesaṃ puttānaṃ mātāpitaro ajjhāgāre pūjitā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with the first teachers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sapubbadevatāni, bhikkhave, tāni kulāni yesaṃ puttānaṃ mātāpitaro ajjhāgāre pūjitā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with the old deities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāhuneyyakāni, bhikkhave, tāni kulāni yesaṃ puttānaṃ mātāpitaro ajjhāgāre pūjitā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmāti, bhikkhave, mātāpitūnaṃ etaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Brahmā’ is a term for your parents. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbācariyāti, bhikkhave, mātāpitūnaṃ etaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘First teachers’ is a term for your parents. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbadevatāti, bhikkhave, mātāpitūnaṃ etaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Old deities’ is a term for your parents. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhuneyyāti, bhikkhave, mātāpitūnaṃ etaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Worthy of an offering dedicated to the gods’ is a term for your parents. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahukārā, bhikkhave, mātāpitaro, puttānaṃ āpādakā posakā imassa lokassa dassetāroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Parents are very helpful to their children, they raise them, nurture them, and show them the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmāti mātāpitaro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Parents are said to be ‘Brahmā’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbācariyāti vuccare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ‘first teachers’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhuneyyā ca puttānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods from their children, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pajāya anukampakā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for they love their offspring. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi ne namasseyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore an astute person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkareyya ca paṇḍito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">would revere them and honor them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Annena atha pānena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with food and drink, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vatthena sayanena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">clothes and bedding, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ucchādanena nhāpanena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">by anointing and bathing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pādānaṃ dhovanena ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and by washing their feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya naṃ pāricariyāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because they look after </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāpitūsu paṇḍitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their parents like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idheva naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re praised in this life by the astute, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pecca sagge pamodatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they depart to rejoice in heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
