<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.083-83. Avaṇṇārahasutta  - 83. Where Criticism Takes You </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.083. 83. Avaṇṇārahasutta  - 83. Where Criticism Takes You </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Macalavagga  - 9. Confirmed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ananuvicca apariyogāhetvā avaṇṇārahassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of criticism, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ananuvicca apariyogāhetvā vaṇṇārahassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they criticize those deserving of praise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ananuvicca apariyogāhetvā appasādanīye ṭhāne pasādaṃ upadaṃseti, ananuvicca apariyogāhetvā pasādanīye ṭhāne appasādaṃ upadaṃseti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They arouse faith in things that are dubious, and they don’t arouse faith in things that are inspiring. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ sagge. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuvicca pariyogāhetvā avaṇṇārahassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of criticism, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuvicca pariyogāhetvā vaṇṇārahassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they praise those deserving of praise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuvicca pariyogāhetvā appasādanīye ṭhāne appasādaṃ upadaṃseti </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t arouse faith in things that are dubious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuvicca pariyogāhetvā pasādanīye ṭhāne pasādaṃ upadaṃseti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they do arouse faith in things that are inspiring. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ sagge”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these four qualities is raised up to heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
