<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.045-45. Rohitassasutta  - 45. With Rohitassa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.045. 45. Rohitassasutta  - 45. With Rohitassa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Rohitassavagga  - 5. With Rohitassa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rohitasso devaputto abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho rohitasso devaputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the glorious god Rohitassa, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yattha nu kho, bhante, na jāyati na jīyati na mīyati na cavati na upapajjati, sakkā nu kho so, bhante, gamanena lokassa anto ñātuṃ vā daṭṭhuṃ vā pāpuṇituṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, is it possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling to a place where there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yattha kho, āvuso, na jāyati na jīyati na mīyati na cavati na upapajjati, nāhaṃ taṃ gamanena lokassa antaṃ ñāteyyaṃ daṭṭheyyaṃ patteyyanti vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, I say it’s not possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling to a place where there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva subhāsitamidaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">how well said this was by the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yattha kho, āvuso, na jāyati na jīyati na mīyati na cavati na upapajjati, nāhaṃ taṃ gamanena lokassa antaṃ ñāteyyaṃ daṭṭheyyaṃ patteyyanti vadāmī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbāhaṃ, bhante, rohitasso nāma isi ahosiṃ bhojaputto iddhimā vehāsaṅgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once upon a time, I was a hermit called Rohitassa, son of Bhoja. I was a sky-walker with psychic powers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, evarūpo javo ahosi, seyyathāpi nāma daḷhadhammā dhanuggaho sikkhito katahattho katūpāsano lahukena asanena appakasirena tiriyaṃ tālacchāyaṃ atipāteyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I was as fast as a light arrow easily shot across the shadow of a palm tree by a well-trained expert archer with a strong bow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, evarūpo padavītihāro ahosi, seyyathāpi nāma puratthimā samuddā pacchimo samuddo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">My stride was such that it could span from the eastern ocean to the western ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, evarūpena javena samannāgatassa evarūpena ca padavītihārena evarūpaṃ icchāgataṃ uppajji: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having such speed and stride, this wish came to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ gamanena lokassa antaṃ pāpuṇissāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I will reach the end of the world by traveling.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho ahaṃ, bhante, aññatreva asitapītakhāyitasāyitā aññatra uccārapassāvakammā aññatra niddākilamathapaṭivinodanā vassasatāyuko vassasatajīvī vassasataṃ gantvā appatvāva lokassa antaṃ antarāyeva kālaṅkato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I traveled for my whole lifespan of a hundred years—pausing only to eat and drink, go to the toilet, and sleep to dispel weariness—and I passed away along the way, never reaching the end of the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva subhāsitamidaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">how well said this was by the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yattha kho, āvuso, na jāyati na jīyati na mīyati na cavati na upapajjati, nāhaṃ taṃ gamanena lokassa antaṃ ñāteyyaṃ daṭṭheyyaṃ patteyyanti vadāmī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Yattha kho, āvuso, na jāyati na jīyati na mīyati na cavati na upapajjati, nāhaṃ taṃ gamanena lokassa antaṃ ñāteyyaṃ daṭṭheyyaṃ patteyyan’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, I say it’s not possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling to a place where there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāhaṃ, āvuso, appatvāva lokassa antaṃ dukkhassa antakiriyaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I also say there’s no making an end of suffering without reaching the end of the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api cāhaṃ, āvuso, imasmiṃyeva byāmamatte kaḷevare sasaññimhi samanake lokañca paññāpemi lokasamudayañca lokanirodhañca lokanirodhagāminiñca paṭipadanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For it is in this fathom-long carcass with its perception and mind that I describe the world, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanena na pattabbo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The end of the world can never </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lokassanto kudācanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">be reached by traveling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca appatvā lokantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But without reaching the end of the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhā atthi pamocanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">there’s no release from suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā have lokavidū sumedho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So a clever person, understanding the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokantagū vusitabrahmacariyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">has completed the spiritual journey, and gone to the end of the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokassa antaṃ samitāvi ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A peaceful one, knowing the end of the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāsīsatī lokamimaṃ parañcā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">does not hope for this world or the next.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
