<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.199-199. Taṇhāsutta  - 199. Craving, the Weaver </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.199. 199. Taṇhāsutta  - 199. Craving, the Weaver </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Mahāvagga  - 20. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“taṇhaṃ vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi jāliniṃ saritaṃ visaṭaṃ visattikaṃ, yāya ayaṃ loko uddhasto pariyonaddho tantākulakajāto gulāguṇṭhikajāto muñjapabbajabhūto apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ saṃsāraṃ nātivattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you about craving—the weaver, the migrant, the ubiquitous, the clinging. This world is choked by it, engulfed by it. It makes the world tangled like yarn, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds, not escaping the places of loss, the bad places, the underworld, transmigration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamā ca sā, bhikkhave, taṇhā jālinī saritā visaṭā visattikā, yāya ayaṃ loko uddhasto pariyonaddho tantākulakajāto gulāguṇṭhikajāto muñjapabbajabhūto apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ saṃsāraṃ nātivattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what is that craving …? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhārasa kho panimāni, bhikkhave, taṇhāvicaritāni ajjhattikassa upādāya, aṭṭhārasa taṇhāvicaritāni bāhirassa upādāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior, and eighteen that derive from the exterior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni aṭṭhārasa taṇhāvicaritāni ajjhattikassa upādāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asmīti, bhikkhave, sati itthasmīti hoti, evaṃsmīti hoti, aññathāsmīti hoti, asasmīti hoti, satasmīti hoti, santi hoti, itthaṃ santi hoti, evaṃ santi hoti, aññathā santi hoti, apihaṃ santi hoti, apihaṃ itthaṃ santi hoti, apihaṃ evaṃ santi hoti, apihaṃ aññathā santi hoti, bhavissanti hoti, itthaṃ bhavissanti hoti, evaṃ bhavissanti hoti, aññathā bhavissanti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is the concept ‘I am’, there are the concepts ‘I am such’, ‘I am thus’, ‘I am otherwise’; ‘I am fleeting’, ‘I am lasting’; ‘mine’, ‘such is mine’, ‘thus is mine’, ‘otherwise is mine’; ‘also mine’, ‘such is also mine’, ‘thus is also mine’, ‘otherwise is also mine’; ‘I will be’, ‘I will be such’, ‘I will be thus’, ‘I will be otherwise’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni aṭṭhārasa taṇhāvicaritāni ajjhattikassa upādāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni aṭṭhārasa taṇhāvicaritāni bāhirassa upādāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the exterior? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināsmīti, bhikkhave, sati iminā itthasmīti hoti, iminā evaṃsmīti hoti, iminā aññathāsmīti hoti, iminā asasmīti hoti, iminā satasmīti hoti, iminā santi hoti, iminā itthaṃ santi hoti, iminā evaṃ santi hoti, iminā aññathā santi hoti, iminā apihaṃ santi hoti, iminā apihaṃ itthaṃ santi hoti, iminā apihaṃ evaṃ santi hoti, iminā apihaṃ aññathā santi hoti, iminā bhavissanti hoti, iminā itthaṃ bhavissanti hoti, iminā evaṃ bhavissanti hoti, iminā aññathā bhavissanti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is the concept ‘I am because of this’, there are the concepts ‘I am such because of this’, ‘I am thus because of this’, ‘I am otherwise because of this’; ‘I am fleeting because of this’, ‘I am lasting because of this’; ‘mine because of this’, ‘such is mine because of this’, ‘thus is mine because of this’, ‘otherwise is mine because of this’; ‘also mine because of this’, ‘such is also mine because of this’, ‘thus is also mine because of this’, ‘otherwise is also mine because of this’; ‘I will be because of this’, ‘I will be such because of this’, ‘I will be thus because of this’, ‘I will be otherwise because of this’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni aṭṭhārasa taṇhāvicaritāni bāhirassa upādāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the exterior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti aṭṭhārasa taṇhāvicaritāni ajjhattikassa upādāya, aṭṭhārasa taṇhāvicaritāni bāhirassa upādāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So there are eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior, and eighteen that derive from the exterior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni vuccanti, bhikkhave, chattiṃsa taṇhāvicaritāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the thirty-six currents of craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti evarūpāni atītāni chattiṃsa taṇhāvicaritāni, anāgatāni chattiṃsa taṇhāvicaritāni, paccuppannāni chattiṃsa taṇhāvicaritāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Each of these pertain to the past, future, and present, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ aṭṭhasataṃ taṇhāvicaritaṃ honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">making one hundred and eight currents of craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho sā, bhikkhave, taṇhā jālinī saritā visaṭā visattikā, yāya ayaṃ loko uddhasto pariyonaddho tantākulakajāto guṇāguṇṭhikajāto muñjapabbajabhūto apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ saṃsāraṃ nātivattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is that craving—the weaver, the migrant, the ubiquitous, the clinging. This world is choked by it, engulfed by it. It makes the world tangled like yarn, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds, not escaping the places of loss, the bad places, the underworld, transmigration.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
