<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.061-61. Pattakammasutta  - 61. Deeds of Substance </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.061. 61. Pattakammasutta  - 61. Deeds of Substance </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Pattakammavagga  - 7. Deeds of Substance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, gahapati, dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā dullabhā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, these four things that are likable, desirable, and agreeable are hard to get in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhogā me uppajjantu sahadhammenāti, ayaṃ paṭhamo dhammo iṭṭho kanto manāpo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The first thing is the wish: ‘May wealth come to me by legitimate means!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhoge laddhā sahadhammena yaso me āgacchatu saha ñātīhi saha upajjhāyehīti, ayaṃ dutiyo dhammo iṭṭho kanto manāpo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The second thing, having got wealth by legitimate means, is the wish: ‘May fame come to me, together with my family and teachers.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhoge laddhā sahadhammena yasaṃ laddhā saha ñātīhi saha upajjhāyehi ciraṃ jīvāmi dīghamāyuṃ pālemīti, ayaṃ tatiyo dhammo iṭṭho kanto manāpo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The third thing, having got wealth and fame, is the wish: ‘May I live long, keeping alive for a long time!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhoge laddhā sahadhammena yasaṃ laddhā saha ñātīhi saha upajjhāyehi ciraṃ jīvitvā dīghamāyuṃ pāletvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjāmīti, ayaṃ catuttho dhammo iṭṭho kanto manāpo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth thing, having got wealth, fame, and long life, is the wish: ‘When my body breaks up, after death, may I be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, gahapati, cattāro dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā dullabhā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four things that are likable, desirable, and agreeable, but hard to get in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, gahapati, catunnaṃ dhammānaṃ iṭṭhānaṃ kantānaṃ manāpānaṃ dullabhānaṃ lokasmiṃ cattāro dhammā paṭilābhāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These next four things lead to the getting of those four things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhāsampadā, sīlasampadā, cāgasampadā, paññāsampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, gahapati, saddhāsampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in faith? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako saddho hoti, saddahati tathāgatassa bodhiṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi, satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, gahapati, saddhāsampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called accomplishment in faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, gahapati, sīlasampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in ethics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti … pe … surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or take alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, gahapati, sīlasampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called accomplishment in ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, gahapati, cāgasampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in generosity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati muttacāgo payatapāṇi vosaggarato yācayogo dānasaṃvibhāgarato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, gahapati, cāgasampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called accomplishment in generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, gahapati, paññāsampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhijjhāvisamalobhābhibhūtena, gahapati, cetasā viharanto akiccaṃ karoti, kiccaṃ aparādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When your heart is mastered by covetousness and immoral greed, you do what you shouldn’t, and fail to do what you should. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiccaṃ karonto kiccaṃ aparādhento yasā ca sukhā ca dhaṃsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your fame and happiness are crushed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpādābhibhūtena, gahapati, cetasā viharanto akiccaṃ karoti, kiccaṃ aparādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When your heart is mastered by ill will … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiccaṃ karonto kiccaṃ aparādhento yasā ca sukhā ca dhaṃsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thinamiddhābhibhūtena, gahapati, cetasā viharanto akiccaṃ karoti kiccaṃ aparādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">dullness and drowsiness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiccaṃ karonto kiccaṃ aparādhento yasā ca sukhā ca dhaṃsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaccakukkuccābhibhūtena, gahapati, cetasā viharanto akiccaṃ karoti, kiccaṃ aparādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">restlessness and remorse … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiccaṃ karonto kiccaṃ aparādhento yasā ca sukhā ca dhaṃsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicikicchābhibhūtena, gahapati, cetasā viharanto akiccaṃ karoti, kiccaṃ aparādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">doubt, you do what you shouldn’t, and fail to do what you should. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiccaṃ karonto kiccaṃ aparādhento yasā ca sukhā ca dhaṃsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your fame and happiness are crushed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kho so, gahapati, ariyasāvako abhijjhāvisamalobho cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā abhijjhāvisamalobhaṃ cittassa upakkilesaṃ pajahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that ‘covetousness and immoral greed are corruptions of the mind’, that noble disciple gives them up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpādo cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā byāpādaṃ cittassa upakkilesaṃ pajahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that ‘ill will …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thinamiddhaṃ cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā thinamiddhaṃ cittassa upakkilesaṃ pajahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘dullness and drowsiness …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaccakukkuccaṃ cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā uddhaccakukkuccaṃ cittassa upakkilesaṃ pajahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘restlessness and remorse …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicikicchā cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā vicikicchaṃ cittassa upakkilesaṃ pajahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘doubt is a corruption of the mind’, that noble disciple gives it up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, gahapati, ariyasāvakassa abhijjhāvisamalobho cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā abhijjhāvisamalobho cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has given up these things, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpādo cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā byāpādo cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thinamiddhaṃ cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā thinamiddhaṃ cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaccakukkuccaṃ cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā uddhaccakukkuccaṃ cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicikicchā cittassa upakkilesoti, iti viditvā vicikicchā cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, gahapati, ariyasāvako mahāpañño puthupañño āpātadaso paññāsampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called ‘a noble disciple of great wisdom, of widespread wisdom, who sees what matters, and is accomplished in wisdom’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, gahapati, paññāsampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called accomplishment in wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, gahapati, catunnaṃ dhammānaṃ iṭṭhānaṃ kantānaṃ manāpānaṃ dullabhānaṃ lokasmiṃ ime cattāro dhammā paṭilābhāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four things that lead to the getting of the four things that are likable, desirable, and agreeable, but hard to get in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kho so, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi cattāri pattakammāni kattā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are four deeds of substance that a noble disciple does with the legitimate wealth he has earned by his efforts and initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi attānaṃ sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To start with, with his legitimate wealth he makes himself happy and pleased, keeping himself properly happy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātāpitaro sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He makes his mother and father happy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puttadāradāsakammakaraporise sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He makes his children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff happy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mittāmacce sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He makes his friends and colleagues happy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa paṭhamaṃ ṭhānagataṃ hoti pattagataṃ āyatanaso paribhuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is his first solid and substantive investment, used in the appropriate sphere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi yā tā honti āpadā aggito vā udakato vā rājato vā corato vā appiyato vā dāyādato, tathārūpāsu āpadāsu pariyodhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he defends himself against threats from such things as fire, flood, rulers, bandits, or unloved heirs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotthiṃ attānaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He keeps himself safe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa dutiyaṃ ṭhānagataṃ hoti pattagataṃ āyatanaso paribhuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is his second solid and substantive investment, used in the appropriate sphere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi pañcabaliṃ kattā hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he makes five spirit-offerings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātibaliṃ, atithibaliṃ, pubbapetabaliṃ, rājabaliṃ, devatābaliṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to relatives, guests, ancestors, king, and deities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa tatiyaṃ ṭhānagataṃ hoti pattagataṃ āyatanaso paribhuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is his third solid and substantive investment, used in the appropriate sphere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā madappamādā paṭiviratā khantisoracce niviṭṭhā ekamattānaṃ damenti, ekamattānaṃ samenti, ekamattānaṃ parinibbāpenti, tathārūpesu samaṇabrāhmaṇesu uddhaggikaṃ dakkhiṇaṃ patiṭṭhāpeti sovaggikaṃ sukhavipākaṃ saggasaṃvattanikaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he establishes an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins—those who avoid intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and gentleness, and who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves—that’s conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa catutthaṃ ṭhānagataṃ hoti pattagataṃ āyatanaso paribhuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is his fourth solid and substantive investment, used in the appropriate sphere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kho so, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi imāni cattāri pattakammāni kattā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four deeds of substance that a noble disciple does with the legitimate wealth he has earned by his efforts and initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, gahapati, aññatra imehi catūhi pattakammehi bhogā parikkhayaṃ gacchanti, ime vuccanti, gahapati, bhogā aṭṭhānagatā apattagatā anāyatanaso paribhuttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever wealth is spent on something other than these four deeds of substance is said to be not a solid or substantive investment, and not used in the appropriate sphere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, gahapati, imehi catūhi pattakammehi bhogā parikkhayaṃ gacchanti, ime vuccanti, gahapati, bhogā ṭhānagatā pattagatā āyatanaso paribhuttāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But whatever wealth is spent on these four deeds of substance is said to be a solid and substantive investment, used in the appropriate sphere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhuttā bhogā bhatā bhaccā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve enjoyed my wealth, supporting those who depend on me; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vitiṇṇā āpadāsu me; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve overcome losses; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaggā dakkhiṇā dinnā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve given uplifting religious donations; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho pañcabalī katā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and made the five spirit-offerings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upaṭṭhitā sīlavanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have looked after the ethical and </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññatā brahmacārayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">disciplined spiritual practitioners. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadatthaṃ bhogaṃ iccheyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve achieved the purpose </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇḍito gharamāvasaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for which an astute lay person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So me attho anuppatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">wishes to gain wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kataṃ ananutāpiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t regret what I’ve done.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ anussaraṃ macco, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mortal person who recollects this </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyadhamme ṭhito naro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">stands firm in the teaching of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idheva naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re praised in this life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pecca sagge pamodatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they depart to rejoice in heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
