<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.079-79. Vaṇijjasutta  - 79. Business </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.079. 79. Vaṇijjasutta  - 79. Business </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Apaṇṇakavagga  - 8. Guaranteed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena midhekaccassa tādisāva vaṇijjā payuttā chedagāminī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why for different people the same kind of business undertaking might fail, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena midhekaccassa tādisāva vaṇijjā payuttā na yathādhippāyā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">while another doesn’t meet expectations, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena midhekaccassa tādisāva vaṇijjā payuttā yathādhippāyā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">another meets expectations, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena midhekaccassa tādisāva vaṇijjā payuttā parādhippāyā hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">and another exceeds expectations?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, sāriputta, ekacco samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā upasaṅkamitvā pavāreti: ‘vadatu, bhante, paccayenā’ti. So yena pavāreti taṃ na deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sāriputta, take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them to ask for what they need. But they fail to give what’s requested. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ce tato cuto itthattaṃ āgacchati, so yaññadeva vaṇijjaṃ payojeti, sāssa hoti chedagāminī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’ve passed away from that life, if they’re reborn in this state of existence, whatever business they undertake fails. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, sāriputta, ekacco samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā upasaṅkamitvā pavāreti: ‘vadatu, bhante, paccayenā’ti. So yena pavāreti taṃ na yathādhippāyaṃ deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them to ask for what they need. They give what’s requested, but don’t meet expectations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ce tato cuto itthattaṃ āgacchati, so yaññadeva vaṇijjaṃ payojeti, sāssa na hoti yathādhippāyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’ve passed away from that life, if they’re reborn in this state of existence, whatever business they undertake doesn’t meet expectations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, sāriputta, ekacco samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā upasaṅkamitvā pavāreti: ‘vadatu, bhante, paccayenā’ti. So yena pavāreti taṃ yathādhippāyaṃ deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them to ask for what they need. They give what’s requested, meeting expectations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ce tato cuto itthattaṃ āgacchati, so yaññadeva vaṇijjaṃ payojeti, sāssa hoti yathādhippāyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’ve passed away from that life, if they’re reborn in this state of existence, whatever business they undertake meets expectations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, sāriputta, ekacco samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā upasaṅkamitvā pavāreti: ‘vadatu, bhante, paccayenā’ti. So yena pavāreti taṃ parādhippāyaṃ deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them to ask for what they need. They give what’s requested, exceeding expectations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ce tato cuto itthattaṃ āgacchati, so yaññadeva vaṇijjaṃ payojeti, sāssa hoti parādhippāyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’ve passed away from that life, if they’re reborn in this state of existence, whatever business they undertake exceeds expectations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, sāriputta, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekaccassa tādisāva vaṇijjā payuttā chedagāminī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why for different people the same kind of business enterprise might fail, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ pana, sāriputta, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekaccassa tādisāva vaṇijjā payuttā na yathādhippāyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while another doesn’t meet expectations, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho pana, sāriputta, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekaccassa tādisāva vaṇijjā payuttā yathādhippāyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">another meets expectations, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ pana, sāriputta, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekaccassa tādisāva vaṇijjā payuttā parādhippāyā hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and another exceeds expectations.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
