<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.173-173. Mahākoṭṭhikasutta  - 173. With Mahākoṭṭhita </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.173. 173. Mahākoṭṭhikasutta  - 173. With Mahākoṭṭhita </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Sañcetaniyavagga  - 18. Intention </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahākoṭṭhiko yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā mahākoṭṭhiko āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, Mahākoṭṭhita sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthaññaṃ kiñcī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, when the six fields of contact have faded away and ceased with nothing left over, does something else exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t put it like that, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā natthaññaṃ kiñcī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Does nothing else exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t put it like that, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthi ca natthi ca aññaṃ kiñcī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do both something else and nothing else exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t put it like that, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā nevatthi no natthaññaṃ kiñcī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do neither something else nor nothing else exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t put it like that, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘mā hevaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, when asked whether—when the six fields of contact have faded away and ceased with nothing left over—something else exists, you say ‘don’t put it like that’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā natthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When asked whether nothing else exists, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā hevaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you say ‘don’t put it like that’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthi ca natthi ca aññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When asked whether both something else and nothing else exist, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā hevaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you say ‘don’t put it like that’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā nevatthi no natthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When asked whether neither something else nor nothing else exist, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā hevaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you say ‘don’t put it like that’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā kathaṃ pana, āvuso, imassa bhāsitassa attho daṭṭhabbo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How then should we see the meaning of this statement?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti vadaṃ appapañcaṃ papañceti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If you say that, ‘When the six fields of contact have faded away and ceased with nothing left over, something else exists’, you’re proliferating the unproliferated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā natthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti vadaṃ appapañcaṃ papañceti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you say that ‘nothing else exists’, you’re proliferating the unproliferated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthi ca natthi ca aññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti vadaṃ appapañcaṃ papañceti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you say that ‘both something else and nothing else exist’, you’re proliferating the unproliferated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā nevatthi no natthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti vadaṃ appapañcaṃ papañceti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you say that ‘neither something else nor nothing else exists’, you’re proliferating the unproliferated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, āvuso, channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ gati tāvatā papañcassa gati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The scope of the six fields of contact extends as far as the scope of proliferation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvatā papañcassa gati tāvatā channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ gati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The scope of proliferation extends as far as the scope of the six fields of contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā papañcanirodho papañcavūpasamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the six fields of contact fade away and cease with nothing left over, proliferation stops and is stilled.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
