<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.052-52. Dutiyapuññābhisandasutta  - 52. Overflowing Merit (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.052. 52. Dutiyapuññābhisandasutta  - 52. Overflowing Merit (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Puññābhisandavagga  - 6. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puññābhisandā kusalābhisandā sukhassāhārā sovaggikā sukhavipākā saggasaṃvattanikā iṭṭhāya kantāya manāpāya hitāya sukhāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro sovaggiko sukhavipāko saggasaṃvattaniko iṭṭhāya kantāya manāpāya hitāya sukhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first kind of overflowing merit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro sovaggiko sukhavipāko saggasaṃvattaniko iṭṭhāya kantāya manāpāya hitāya sukhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second kind of overflowing merit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako saṅghe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ujuppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ñāyappaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, sāmīcippaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, yadidaṃ cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā, esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, straightforward, methodical, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro sovaggiko sukhavipāko saggasaṃvattaniko iṭṭhāya kantāya manāpāya hitāya sukhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third kind of overflowing merit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi acchiddehi asabalehi akammāsehi bhujissehi viññuppasatthehi aparāmaṭṭhehi samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple’s ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro sovaggiko sukhavipāko saggasaṃvattaniko iṭṭhāya kantāya manāpāya hitāya sukhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth kind of overflowing merit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puññābhisandā kusalābhisandā sukhassāhārā sovaggikā sukhavipākā saggasaṃvattanikā iṭṭhāya kantāya manāpāya hitāya sukhāya saṃvattantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa saddhā tathāgate, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has faith in the Realized One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acalā suppatiṭṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">unwavering and well grounded; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlañca yassa kalyāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose ethical conduct is good, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantaṃ pasaṃsitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">praised and loved by the noble ones; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe pasādo yassatthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has confidence in the Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujubhūtañca dassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and correct view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaliddoti taṃ āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re said to be prosperous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amoghaṃ tassa jīvitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their life is not in vain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā saddhañca sīlañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So let the wise devote themselves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasādaṃ dhammadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to faith, ethical behavior, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyuñjetha medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">confidence, and insight into the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saraṃ buddhāna sāsanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">remembering the instructions of the Buddhas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
