<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.031-31. Cakkasutta  - 31. Situations </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.031. 31. Cakkasutta  - 31. Situations </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Cakkavagga  - 4. Situations </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, cakkāni, yehi samannāgatānaṃ devamanussānaṃ catucakkaṃ vattati, yehi samannāgatā devamanussā nacirasseva mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇanti bhogesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four situations. When these situations come about, any god or human who takes advantage of them will soon acquire great and abundant wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpadesavāso, sappurisāvassayo, attasammāpaṇidhi, pubbe ca katapuññatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Living in a suitable region, relying on good people, being rightly resolved in oneself, and past merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri cakkāni, yehi samannāgatānaṃ devamanussānaṃ catucakkaṃ vattati, yehi samannāgatā devamanussā nacirasseva mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇanti bhogesūti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four situations. When these situations come about, any god or human who takes advantage of them will soon acquire great and abundant wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe vase dese, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person lives in a suitable region, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyamittakaro siyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">making friends with noble ones, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāpaṇidhisampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">possessing right resolve, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbe puññakato naro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and having merit from the past, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhaññaṃ dhanaṃ yaso kitti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">grain, riches, fame, reputation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhañcetaṃdhivattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and happiness come to them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
