<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.188-188. Upakasutta  - 188. With Upaka </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.188. 188. Upakasutta  - 188. With Upaka </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 19. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho upako maṇḍikāputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho upako maṇḍikāputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Upaka the son of Maṇḍikā went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahañhi, bhante, evaṃvādī evaṃdiṭṭhi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, this is my doctrine and view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo koci parūpārambhaṃ vatteti, parūpārambhaṃ vattento sabbo so na upapādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Whoever goes on complaining about others without giving any reasons </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupapādento gārayho hoti upavajjo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reprehensible and at fault.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Parūpārambhañce, upaka, vatteti parūpārambhaṃ vattento na upapādeti, anupapādento gārayho hoti upavajjo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Upaka, if someone goes on complaining about others without giving a reason, they’re reprehensible and at fault. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tvaṃ kho, upaka, parūpārambhaṃ vattesi, parūpārambhaṃ vattento na upapādesi, anupapādento gārayho hosi upavajjo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s what you do, so you’re reprehensible and at fault!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhante, ummujjamānakaṃyeva mahatā pāsena bandheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, like a fish caught in a big trap just as it rises, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, ummujjamānakoyeva bhagavatā mahatā vādapāsena baddho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so the Buddha caught me in a big trap of words just as I rose up.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idaṃ akusalanti kho, upaka, mayā paññattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Upaka, I’ve declared: ‘This is unskillful.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha aparimāṇā padā aparimāṇā byañjanā aparimāṇā tathāgatassa dhammadesanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are limitless words, phrases, and teachings of the Realized One about that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipidaṃ akusalanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is another way of saying that this is unskillful.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho panidaṃ akusalaṃ pahātabbanti kho, upaka, mayā paññattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve declared: ‘The unskillful should be given up.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha aparimāṇā padā aparimāṇā byañjanā aparimāṇā tathāgatassa dhammadesanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are limitless words, phrases, and teachings of the Realized One about that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipidaṃ akusalaṃ pahātabbanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is another way of saying that the unskillful should be given up.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kusalanti kho, upaka, mayā paññattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve declared that: ‘This is skillful.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha aparimāṇā padā aparimāṇā byañjanā aparimāṇā tathāgatassa dhammadesanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are limitless words, phrases, and teachings of the Realized One about that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipidaṃ kusalanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is another way of saying that this is skillful.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho panidaṃ kusalaṃ bhāvetabbanti kho, upaka, mayā paññattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve declared: ‘The skillful should be developed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha aparimāṇā padā aparimāṇā byañjanā aparimāṇā tathāgatassa dhammadesanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are limitless words, phrases, and teachings of the Realized One about that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipidaṃ kusalaṃ bhāvetabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is another way of saying that the skillful should be developed.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho upako maṇḍikāputto bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā yena rājā māgadho ajātasattu vedehiputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā yāvatako ahosi bhagavatā saddhiṃ kathāsallāpo taṃ sabbaṃ rañño māgadhassa ajātasattussa vedehiputtassa ārocesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Upaka the son of Maṇḍikā approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he went up to King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha. He told the King of all they had discussed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, rājā māgadho ajātasattu vedehiputto kupito anattamano upakaṃ maṇḍikāputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But Ajātasattu became angry and upset, and said to Upaka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāva dhaṃsī vatāyaṃ loṇakāradārako yāva mukharo yāva pagabbo yatra hi nāma taṃ bhagavantaṃ arahantaṃ sammāsambuddhaṃ āsādetabbaṃ maññissati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How rude of this salt-maker’s boy! How impolite and impudent of him to imagine he could attack the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apehi tvaṃ, upaka, vinassa, mā taṃ addasan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Get out, Upaka, go away! Don’t let me see you again.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
