<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.182-182. Pāṭibhogasutta  - 182. Guarantee </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.182. 182. Pāṭibhogasutta  - 182. Guarantee </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 19. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catunnaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ natthi koci pāṭibhogo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are four things that no-one can guarantee—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not an ascetic, a brahmin, a god, a Māra, a Brahmā, or anyone in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Jarādhammaṃ mā jīrī’ti natthi koci pāṭibhogo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">No-one can guarantee that someone liable to grow old will not grow old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘byādhidhammaṃ mā byādhiyī’ti natthi koci pāṭibhogo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">No-one can guarantee that someone liable to sickness will not get sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘maraṇadhammaṃ mā mīyī’ti natthi koci pāṭibhogo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">No-one can guarantee that someone liable to death will not die. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yāni kho pana tāni pubbe attanā katāni pāpakāni kammāni saṅkilesikāni ponobhavikāni sadarāni dukkhavipākāni āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇikāni, tesaṃ vipāko mā nibbattī’ti natthi koci pāṭibhogo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">No-one can guarantee that the bad deeds done in past lives—corrupted, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death—will not produce their result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ dhammānaṃ natthi koci pāṭibhogo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four things that no-one can guarantee—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not an ascetic, a brahmin, a god, a Māra, a Brahmā, or anyone in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
