<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.023-23. Lokasutta  - 23. The World </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.023. 23. Lokasutta  - 23. The World </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Uruvelavagga  - 3. At Uruvelā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Loko, bhikkhave, tathāgatena abhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the world has been understood by a Realized One; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokasmā tathāgato visaṃyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he is detached from the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokasamudayo, bhikkhave, tathāgatena abhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The origin of the world has been understood by a Realized One; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokasamudayo tathāgatassa pahīno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he has given up the origin of the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokanirodho, bhikkhave, tathāgatena abhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation of the world has been understood by a Realized One; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokanirodho tathāgatassa sacchikato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he has realized the cessation of the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokanirodhagāminī paṭipadā, bhikkhave, tathāgatena abhisambuddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of the world has been understood by a Realized One; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokanirodhagāminī paṭipadā tathāgatassa bhāvitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he has developed the practice that leads to the cessation of the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, sadevakassa lokassa samārakassa sabrahmakassa sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā, sabbaṃ taṃ tathāgatena abhisambuddhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this world—with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—whatever is seen, heard, thought, known, sought, and explored by the mind, all that has been understood by a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā ‘tathāgato’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañca, bhikkhave, rattiṃ tathāgato anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambujjhati yañca rattiṃ anupādisesāya nibbānadhātuyā parinibbāyati, yaṃ etasmiṃ antare bhāsati lapati niddisati sabbaṃ taṃ tatheva hoti, no aññathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From the night when a Realized One understands the supreme perfect awakening until the night he becomes fully extinguished—through the natural principle of extinguishment, without anything left over—everything he speaks, says, and expresses is real, not otherwise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā ‘tathāgato’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāvādī, bhikkhave, tathāgato tathākārī, yathākārī tathāvādī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One does as he says, and says as he does. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti yathāvādī tathākārī, yathākārī tathāvādī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since this is so, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā ‘tathāgato’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadevake, bhikkhave, loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya tathāgato abhibhū anabhibhūto aññadatthu daso vasavattī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—the Realized One is the undefeated, the champion, the universal seer, the wielder of power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā ‘tathāgato’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaṃ lokaṃ abhiññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Directly knowing the whole world as it is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaṃ loke yathātathaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and everything in it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaṃ lokaṃ visaṃyutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">he is detached from the whole world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaloke anūpayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">disengaged from the whole world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve sabbābhibhū dhīro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That wise one is the champion </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaganthappamocano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has escaped all ties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phuṭṭha’ssa paramā santi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has reached ultimate peace: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbānaṃ akutobhayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">extinguishment, fearing nothing from any quarter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esa khīṇāsavo buddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is the Buddha, with defilements ended, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anīgho chinnasaṃsayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">untroubled, with doubts cut off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbakammakkhayaṃ patto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has attained the end of all karma, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimutto upadhisaṅkhaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">freed with the end of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esa so bhagavā buddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That Blessed One is the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">esa sīho anuttaro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he is the supreme lion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadevakassa lokassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">in all the world with its gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacakkaṃ pavattayī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he turns the holy wheel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti devā manussā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so those gods and humans, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who have gone to the Buddha for refuge, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgamma taṃ namassanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">come together and revere him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahantaṃ vītasāradaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the great one, rid of naivety: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Danto damayataṃ seṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Tamed, he is the best of tamers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santo samayataṃ isi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">peaceful, he is the hermit among the peaceful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mutto mocayataṃ aggo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">liberated, he is the foremost of liberators, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇo tārayataṃ varo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">crossed over, he is the most excellent of guides across.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti hetaṃ namassanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so they revere him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahantaṃ vītasāradaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the great one, rid of naivety. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadevakasmiṃ lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the world with its gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi me paṭipuggalo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has no counterpart.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
