<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.008-8. Vesārajjasutta  - 8. Self-assured </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.008. 8. Vesārajjasutta  - 8. Self-assured </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhaṇḍagāmavagga  - 1. At Bhaṇḍa Village </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa vesārajjāni, yehi vesārajjehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a Realized One has four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Sammāsambuddhassa te paṭijānato ime dhammā anabhisambuddhā”ti tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessatī’ti nimittametaṃ, bhikkhave, na samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to be fully awakened, but you don’t understand these things.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamahaṃ, bhikkhave, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Khīṇāsavassa te paṭijānato ime āsavā aparikkhīṇā”ti tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessatī’ti nimittametaṃ, bhikkhave, na samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to have ended all defilements, but these defilements have not ended.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamahaṃ, bhikkhave, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Ye kho pana te antarāyikā dhammā vuttā te paṭisevato nālaṃ antarāyāyā”ti tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessatī’ti nimittametaṃ, bhikkhave, na samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘The acts that you say are obstructions are not really obstructions for the one who performs them.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamahaṃ, bhikkhave, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Yassa kho pana te atthāya dhammo desito so na niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā”ti tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessatī’ti nimittametaṃ, bhikkhave, na samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘Though you teach that this teaching leads to the goal of the complete ending of suffering, it doesn’t lead there for one who practices it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamahaṃ, bhikkhave, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri tathāgatassa vesārajjāni, yehi vesārajjehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavattetīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A Realized One has these four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kecime vādapathā puthussitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The various grounds for criticism </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃnissitā samaṇabrāhmaṇā ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that ascetics and brahmins rely on </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgataṃ patvā na te bhavanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t touch a Realized One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visāradaṃ vādapathātivattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">assured, gone beyond grounds for criticism. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dhammacakkaṃ abhibhuyya kevalī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He rolls forth the Wheel of Dhamma as a consummate one, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavattayī sabbabhūtānukampī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">complete, compassionate for all living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ tādisaṃ devamanussaseṭṭhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings revere him, best of gods and humans, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattā namassanti bhavassa pāragun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has gone beyond rebirth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
