<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.110-110. Āsīvisasutta  - 110. Vipers </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.110. 110. Āsīvisasutta  - 110. Vipers </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Valāhakavagga  - 11. Clouds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, āsīvisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of viper. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āgataviso na ghoraviso, ghoraviso na āgataviso, āgataviso ca ghoraviso ca, nevāgataviso na ghoraviso—</span></p>
<p class="p3">~One whose venom is fast-acting but not lethal, ~one whose venom is lethal but not fast-acting, ~one whose venom is both fast-acting and lethal, and ~one whose venom is neither fast-acting nor lethal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro āsīvisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of viper. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, cattāro āsīvisūpamā puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, these four people similar to vipers are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āgataviso na ghoraviso, ghoraviso na āgataviso, āgataviso ca ghoraviso ca, nevāgataviso na ghoraviso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">~One whose venom is fast-acting but not lethal, ~one whose venom is lethal but not fast-acting, ~one whose venom is both fast-acting and lethal, and ~one whose venom is neither fast-acting nor lethal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo āgataviso hoti, na ghoraviso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person’s venom fast-acting but not lethal? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo abhiṇhaṃ kujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is often angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca khvassa kodho na dīgharattaṃ anuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but their anger doesn’t linger long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo āgataviso hoti, na ghoraviso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person’s venom is fast-acting but not lethal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, āsīviso āgataviso, na ghoraviso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That person is like a viper whose venom is fast-acting but not lethal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo ghoraviso hoti, na āgataviso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person’s venom lethal but not fast-acting? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo na heva kho abhiṇhaṃ kujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is not often angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca khvassa kodho dīgharattaṃ anuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but their anger lingers for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo ghoraviso hoti, na āgataviso. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, āsīviso ghoraviso, na āgataviso; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo āgataviso ca hoti ghoraviso ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person’s venom both fast-acting and lethal? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo abhiṇhaṃ kujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is often angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca khvassa kodho dīgharattaṃ anuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their anger lingers for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo āgataviso ca hoti ghoraviso ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, āsīviso āgataviso ca ghoraviso ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo nevāgataviso hoti na ghoraviso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person’s venom neither fast-acting nor lethal? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo na heva kho abhiṇhaṃ kujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is not often angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca khvassa kodho na dīgharattaṃ anuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their anger doesn’t linger long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo nevāgataviso hoti, na ghoraviso. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, āsīviso nevāgataviso na ghoraviso; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro āsīvisūpamā puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four people similar to vipers are found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Valāhakavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve valāhā kumbha udaka, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rahadā dve honti ambāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mūsikā balībaddā rukkhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsīvisena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
