<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.005-5. Anusotasutta  - 5. With the Stream </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.005. 5. Anusotasutta  - 5. With the Stream </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhaṇḍagāmavagga  - 1. At Bhaṇḍa Village </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusotagāmī puggalo, paṭisotagāmī puggalo, ṭhitatto puggalo, tiṇṇo pāraṅgato thale tiṭṭhati brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who goes with the stream; a person who goes against the stream; a steadfast person; and a brahmin who has crossed over and stands on the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, anusotagāmī puggalo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the person who goes with the stream? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo kāme ca paṭisevati, pāpañca kammaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who takes part in sensual pleasures and does bad deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, anusotagāmī puggalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who goes with the stream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, paṭisotagāmī puggalo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the person who goes against the stream? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo kāme ca nappaṭisevati, pāpañca kammaṃ na karoti, sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena assumukhopi rudamāno paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who doesn’t take part in sensual pleasures or do bad deeds. They live the full and pure spiritual life in pain and sadness, weeping, with tearful faces. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, paṭisotagāmī puggalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who goes against the stream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, ṭhitatto puggalo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the steadfast person? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko hoti, tattha parinibbāyī, anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ṭhitatto puggalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a steadfast person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo tiṇṇo pāraṅgato thale tiṭṭhati brāhmaṇo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is a brahmin who has crossed over and stands on the far shore? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo tiṇṇo pāraṅgato thale tiṭṭhati brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a brahmin who has crossed over and stands on the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasminti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci kāmesu asaññatā janā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">All those people with uncontrolled sensuality, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avītarāgā idha kāmabhogino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not free of lust, enjoying sensual pleasures in this life: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punappunaṃ jātijarūpagāmi te, </span></p>
<p class="p3">again and again, they return to birth and old age; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhādhipannā anusotagāmino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who go with the stream are sunk in craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi dhīro idhupaṭṭhitassatī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So a wise one in this life, with mindfulness established, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāme ca pāpe ca asevamāno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">doesn’t take part in sensual pleasures and bad deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahāpi dukkhena jaheyya kāme, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In pain they’d give up sensual pleasures: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭisotagāmīti tamāhu puggalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they call that person ‘one who goes against the stream’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ve kilesāni pahāya pañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who’s given up five corruptions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripuṇṇasekho aparihānadhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a perfect trainee, not liable to decline, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetovasippatto samāhitindriyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s mastered their mind, with faculties immersed in samādhi, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve ṭhitattoti naro pavuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s called ‘a steadfast person’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paroparā yassa samecca dhammā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sage who has comprehended all things, high and low, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vidhūpitā atthagatā na santi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">cleared them and ended them, so they are no more; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve muni vusitabrahmacariyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve completed the spiritual journey, and gone to the end of the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokantagū pāragatoti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called ‘one who has gone beyond’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
