<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.091-91. Asurasutta  - 91. Demons </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.091. 91. Asurasutta  - 91. Demons </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Asuravagga  - 10. Demons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asuro asuraparivāro, asuro devaparivāro, devo asuraparivāro, devo devaparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">~A demon surrounded by demons, ~a demon surrounded by gods, ~a god surrounded by demons, and ~a god surrounded by gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo asuro hoti asuraparivāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a demon surrounded by demons? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo dussīlo hoti pāpadhammo, parisāpissa hoti dussīlā pāpadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is unethical, of bad character, and their followers are the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo asuro hoti asuraparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is a demon surrounded by demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo asuro hoti devaparivāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a demon surrounded by gods? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo dussīlo hoti pāpadhammo, parisā ca khvassa hoti sīlavatī kalyāṇadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is unethical, of bad character, but their followers are ethical, of good character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo asuro hoti devaparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is a demon surrounded by gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo devo hoti asuraparivāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a god surrounded by demons? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sīlavā hoti kalyāṇadhammo, parisā ca khvassa hoti dussīlā pāpadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is ethical, of good character, but their followers are unethical, of bad character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo devo hoti asuraparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is a god surrounded by demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo devo hoti devaparivāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a god surrounded by gods? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sīlavā hoti kalyāṇadhammo, parisāpissa hoti sīlavatī kalyāṇadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is ethical, of good character, and their followers are the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo devo hoti, devaparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is a god surrounded by gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
