<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.210-210. Catutthapāpadhammasutta  - 210. Bad Character (4th) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.210. 210. Catutthapāpadhammasutta  - 210. Bad Character (4th) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Sappurisavagga  - 21. A Good Person </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pāpadhammañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, pāpadhammena pāpadhammatarañca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you bad character and worse character, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇadhammañca, kalyāṇadhammena kalyāṇadhammatarañca. Taṃ suṇātha … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">good character and better character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pāpadhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who has bad character? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco micchādiṭṭhiko hoti … pe … micchāñāṇī hoti, micchāvimutti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called bad character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pāpadhammena pāpadhammataro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who has worse character? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco attanā ca micchādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca micchādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti … pe … attanā ca micchāñāṇī hoti, parañca micchāñāṇe samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. And they encourage others in these same qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca micchāvimutti hoti, parañca micchāvimuttiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpadhammena pāpadhammataro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called worse character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kalyāṇadhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who has good character? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sammādiṭṭhiko hoti … pe … sammāñāṇī hoti, sammāvimutti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kalyāṇadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called good character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kalyāṇadhammena kalyāṇadhammataro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who has better character? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco attanā ca sammādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca sammādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti … pe … attanā ca sammāñāṇī hoti, parañca sammāñāṇe samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. And they encourage others in these same qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca sammāvimutti hoti, parañca sammāvimuttiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kalyāṇadhammena kalyāṇadhammataro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called better character.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappurisavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhāpadañca assaddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattakammaṃ atho ca dasakammaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhaṅgikañca dasamaggaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve pāpadhammā apare dveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
