<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.114-114. Nāgasutta  - 114. A Royal Elephant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.114. 114. Nāgasutta  - 114. A Royal Elephant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Kesivagga  - 12. With Kesi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato rañño nāgo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅganteva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with four factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo sotā ca hoti, hantā ca, khantā ca, gantā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A royal bull elephant listens, destroys, endures, and goes fast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo sotā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a royal bull elephant listen? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo yamenaṃ hatthidammasārathi kāraṇaṃ kāreti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a royal bull elephant pays heed, pays attention, engages wholeheartedly, and lends an ear to whatever task the elephant trainer has it do, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi vā katapubbaṃ yadi vā akatapubbaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">whether or not it has done it before. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasoto suṇāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo sotā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a royal bull elephant listens. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo hantā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a royal bull elephant destroy? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo saṅgāmagato hatthimpi hanati, hatthāruhampi hanati, assampi hanati, assāruhampi hanati, rathampi hanati, rathikampi hanati, pattikampi hanati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a royal bull elephant in battle destroys elephants with their riders, horses with their riders, chariots and charioteers, and foot soldiers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo hantā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a royal bull elephant destroys. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo khantā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a royal bull elephant endure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha bhikkhave, rañño nāgo saṅgāmagato khamo hoti sattippahārānaṃ asippahārānaṃ usuppahārānaṃ bheripaṇavasaṅkhatiṇavaninnādasaddānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a royal bull elephant in battle endures being struck by spears, swords, arrows, and axes; it endures the thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and cymbals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo khantā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a royal bull elephant endures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo gantā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a royal bull elephant go fast? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo yamenaṃ hatthidammasārathi disaṃ peseti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a royal bull elephant swiftly goes in whatever direction the elephant trainer sends it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi vā gatapubbaṃ yadi vā agatapubbaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">whether or not it has been there before. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ khippameva gantā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo gantā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a royal bull elephant goes fast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi aṅgehi samannāgato rañño nāgo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅganteva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A royal bull elephant with four factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant with four factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sotā ca hoti, hantā ca, khantā ca, gantā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant listens, destroys, endures, and goes fast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sotā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant listen? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye desiyamāne aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasoto dhammaṃ suṇāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant pays heed, pays attention, engages wholeheartedly, and lends an ear when the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One is being taught. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sotā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant listens. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu hantā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant destroy? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu uppannaṃ kāmavitakkaṃ nādhivāseti pajahati vinodeti hanati byantīkaroti anabhāvaṃ gameti, uppannaṃ byāpādavitakkaṃ … pe … uppannaṃ vihiṃsāvitakkaṃ … pe … uppannuppanne pāpake akusale dhamme nādhivāseti pajahati vinodeti hanati byantīkaroti anabhāvaṃ gameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought. They don’t tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu hantā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant destroys. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu khantā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant endure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu khamo hoti sītassa uṇhassa jighacchāya pipāsāya, ḍaṃsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassānaṃ duruttānaṃ durāgatānaṃ vacanapathānaṃ uppannānaṃ sārīrikānaṃ vedanānaṃ dukkhānaṃ tibbānaṃ kharānaṃ kaṭukānaṃ asātānaṃ amanāpānaṃ pāṇaharānaṃ adhivāsakajātiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant endures cold, heat, hunger, and thirst; the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; rude and unwelcome criticism; and they put up with physical pain—sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu khantā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant endures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu gantā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant go fast? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yāyaṃ disā agatapubbā iminā dīghena addhunā yadidaṃ sabbasaṅkhārasamatho sabbūpadhipaṭinissaggo taṇhākkhayo virāgo nirodho nibbānaṃ, taṃ khippaññeva gantā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant swiftly goes in the direction they’ve never gone before in all this long time; that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu gantā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant goes fast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these four factors … is the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
