<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.019-19. Tatiyaagatisutta  - 19. Prejudice (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.019. 19. Tatiyaagatisutta  - 19. Prejudice (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Caravagga  - 2. Walking </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, agatigamanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four ways of making prejudiced decisions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandāgatiṃ gacchati, dosāgatiṃ gacchati, mohāgatiṃ gacchati, bhayāgatiṃ gacchati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Making decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri agatigamanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ways of making prejudiced decisions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, nāgatigamanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these four ways of making unprejudiced decisions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na chandāgatiṃ gacchati, na dosāgatiṃ gacchati, na mohāgatiṃ gacchati, na bhayāgatiṃ gacchati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Making decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri nāgatigamanānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ways of making unprejudiced decisions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandā dosā bhayā mohā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you act against the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo dhammaṃ ativattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, or stupidity, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nihīyati tassa yaso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">your fame fades away, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāḷapakkheva candimā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the moon in the waning fortnight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandā dosā bhayā mohā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t act against the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo dhammaṃ nātivattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, and stupidity, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpūrati tassa yaso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">your fame swells, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukkapakkheva candimā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the moon in the waxing fortnight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
