<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.093-93. Dutiyasamādhisutta  - 93. Immersion (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.093. 93. Dutiyasamādhisutta  - 93. Immersion (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Asuravagga  - 10. Demons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo lābhī hoti ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa, na lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person has internal serenity of heart, but not the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo lābhī hoti adhipaññādhammavipassanāya, na lābhī ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person has the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, but not internal serenity of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo na ceva lābhī hoti ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa na ca lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person has neither internal serenity of heart, nor the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo lābhī ceva hoti ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa lābhī ca adhipaññādhammavipassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person has both internal serenity of heart, and the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, yvāyaṃ puggalo lābhī hoti ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa na lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya, tena, bhikkhave, puggalena ajjhattaṃ cetosamathe patiṭṭhāya adhipaññādhammavipassanāya yogo karaṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As for the person who has serenity but not discernment: grounded on serenity, they should practice meditation to get discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena lābhī ceva hoti ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa lābhī ca adhipaññādhammavipassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time they have both serenity and discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, yvāyaṃ puggalo lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya na lābhī ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa, tena, bhikkhave, puggalena adhipaññādhammavipassanāya patiṭṭhāya ajjhattaṃ cetosamathe yogo karaṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As for the person who has discernment but not serenity: grounded on discernment, they should practice meditation to get serenity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena lābhī ceva hoti adhipaññādhammavipassanāya lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time they have both discernment and serenity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, yvāyaṃ puggalo na ceva lābhī ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa na ca lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya, tena, bhikkhave, puggalena tesaṃyeva kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭilābhāya adhimatto chando ca vāyāmo ca ussāho ca ussoḷhī ca appaṭivānī ca sati ca sampajaññañca karaṇīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As for the person who has neither serenity nor discernment: in order to get those skillful qualities, they should apply outstanding enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ādittacelo vā ādittasīso vā tasseva celassa vā sīsassa vā nibbāpanāya adhimattaṃ chandañca vāyāmañca ussāhañca ussoḷhiñca appaṭivāniñca satiñca sampajaññañca kareyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you’d apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tena puggalena tesaṃyeva kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭilābhāya adhimatto chando ca vāyāmo ca ussāho ca ussoḷhī ca appaṭivānī ca sati ca sampajaññañca karaṇīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, in order to get those skillful qualities, that person should apply outstanding enthusiasm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena lābhī ceva hoti ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa lābhī ca adhipaññādhammavipassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time they have both serenity and discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, yvāyaṃ puggalo lābhī ceva hoti ajjhattaṃ cetosamathassa lābhī ca adhipaññādhammavipassanāya, tena, bhikkhave, puggalena tesuyeva kusalesu dhammesu patiṭṭhāya uttari āsavānaṃ khayāya yogo karaṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As for the person who has both serenity and discernment: grounded on those skillful qualities, they should practice meditation further to end the defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
