<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-ss3_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullavācāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">3. The training rule on indecent speech </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā udāyī araññe viharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Udāyī was staying in a beautiful dwelling in the wilderness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassāyasmato vihāro abhirūpo hoti dassanīyo pāsādiko.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā itthiyo ārāmaṁ āgamaṁsu vihārapekkhikāyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion a number of women came to the monastery to see the dwellings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā itthiyo yenāyasmā udāyī tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">They approached Udāyī </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“icchāma mayaṁ, bhante, ayyassa vihāraṁ pekkhitun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, we would like to see your dwelling.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī tā itthiyo vihāraṁ pekkhāpetvā tāsaṁ itthīnaṁ vaccamaggaṁ passāvamaggaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati yācatipi āyācatipi pucchatipi paṭipucchatipi ācikkhatipi anusāsatipi akkosatipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after showing them his dwelling, he praised and disparaged their private parts; he requested and implored, asked and enquired, described, instructed, and abused their private parts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā itthiyo chinnikā dhuttikā ahirikāyo tā āyasmatā udāyinā saddhiṁ uhasantipi ullapantipi ujjagghantipi uppaṇḍentipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The shameless and indecent women flirted with Udāyī; they called out to him, laughed with him, and teased him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā pana tā itthiyo hirimanā tā nikkhamitvā bhikkhū ujjhāpenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But after leaving, those of them who had a sense of shame complained to the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ, bhante, nacchannaṁ nappatirūpaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, this isn’t suitable or appropriate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmikenapi mayaṁ evaṁ vuttā na iccheyyāma, kiṁ panāyyena udāyinā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">We wouldn’t want to hear such speech from our own husbands, let alone from Venerable Udāyī.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā udāyī mātugāmaṁ duṭṭhullāhi vācāhi obhāsissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Udāyī speak indecently to women?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They rebuked Udāyī in many ways and told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned Udāyī: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, udāyi, mātugāmaṁ duṭṭhullāhi vācāhi obhāsasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Udāyī, that you spoke like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ananucchavikaṁ, moghapurisa, ananulomikaṁ appatirūpaṁ assāmaṇakaṁ akappiyaṁ akaraṇīyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s not suitable, foolish man, it’s not proper, it’s not worthy of a monastic, it’s not allowable, it should not to be done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, mātugāmaṁ duṭṭhullāhi vācāhi obhāsissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could you speak like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nanu mayā, moghapurisa, anekapariyāyena virāgāya dhammo desito no sarāgāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Haven’t I given many teachings for the sake of dispassion, not for the sake of passion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmapariḷāhānaṁ vūpasamo akkhāto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the stilling of the fevers of sensual pleasure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu otiṇṇo vipariṇatena cittena mātugāmaṁ duṭṭhullāhi vācāhi obhāseyya yathā taṁ yuvā yuvatiṁ methunupasaṁhitāhi, saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk, overcome by lust and with a distorted mind, speaks indecent words to a woman, as a young man might to a young woman and referring to sexual intercourse, he commits an offense entailing suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Otiṇṇo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Overcome by lust: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāratto apekkhavā paṭibaddhacitto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having lust, longing for, in love with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vipariṇatanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Distorted: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattampi cittaṁ vipariṇataṁ, duṭṭhampi cittaṁ vipariṇataṁ mūḷhampi cittaṁ vipariṇataṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lustful mind is distorted; an angry mind is distorted; a confused mind is distorted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca rattaṁ cittaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetaṁ vipariṇatanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But in this case “distorted” refers to the lustful mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussitthī, na yakkhī, na petī, na tiracchānagatā. Viññū paṭibalā subhāsitadubbhāsitaṁ duṭṭhullāduṭṭhullaṁ ājānituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human female, not a female spirit, not a female ghost, not a female animal. She understands and is capable of discerning bad speech and good speech, what is decent and what is indecent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Indecent words: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vācā vaccamaggapassāvamaggamethunadhammappaṭisaṁyuttā vācā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">speech connected with the anus, the vagina, or sexual intercourse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Obhāseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Speaks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhācāro vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">misconduct is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā taṁ yuvā yuvatinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a young man might to a young woman: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daharo dahariṁ, taruṇo taruṇiṁ, kāmabhogī kāmabhoginiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a male youth to a female youth, a boy to a girl, a male who indulges in worldly pleasures to a female who indulges in worldly pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunupasaṁhitāhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Referring to sexual intercourse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">methunadhammappaṭisaṁyuttāhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">connected with the sexual act. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He commits an offense entailing suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati saṅghādisesoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called “an offense entailing suspension”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve magge ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati, avaṇṇampi bhaṇati, yācatipi, āyācatipi, pucchatipi, paṭipucchatipi, ācikkhatipi, anusāsatipi, akkosatipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Referring to the two private orifices, he praises, disparages, requests, implores, asks, enquires, describes, instructs, abuses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaṇṇaṁ bhaṇati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Praises: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve magge thometi vaṇṇeti pasaṁsati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">extols, praises, commends the two private orifices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avaṇṇaṁ bhaṇati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Disparages: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve magge khuṁseti vambheti garahati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">despises, reviles, censures the two private orifices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yācati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Requests: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dehi me, arahasi me dātunti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">saying, “Give to me; you should give to me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyācati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Implores: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kadā te mātā pasīdissati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">saying, “When will you please your mother?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kadā te pitā pasīdissati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When will you please your father?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kadā te devatāyo pasīdissanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When will you please the gods?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kadā sukhaṇo sulayo sumuhutto bhavissati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When will there be a good opportunity, a good time, a good moment?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kadā te methunaṁ dhammaṁ labhissāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When will I have sexual intercourse with you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pucchati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Asks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṁ tvaṁ sāmikassa desi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">saying, “How do you give to your husband?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṁ jārassa desīti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How do you give to your lover?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭipucchati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Enquires: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṁ kira tvaṁ sāmikassa desi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">saying, “So you give to your husband like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṁ jārassa desīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and to your lover like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ācikkhati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Describes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puṭṭho bhaṇati— “evaṁ dehi. Evaṁ dentā sāmikassa piyā bhavissati manāpā cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when asked, he says, “Give like this. If you do, you’ll be dear and pleasing to your husband.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusāsati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Instructs: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apuṭṭho bhaṇati— “evaṁ dehi. Evaṁ dentā sāmikassa piyā bhavissati manāpā cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">without being asked, he says, “Give like this. If you do, you’ll be dear and pleasing to your husband.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkosati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Abuses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">animittāsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">saying, “You lack genitals;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nimittamattāsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You have incomplete genitals;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">alohitāsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You don’t menstruate;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhuvalohitāsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You menstruate continuously;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhuvacoḷāsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You always wear a menstruation pad;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paggharantīsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re incontinent;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikharaṇīsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You have genital prolapse;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthipaṇḍakāsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You lack sexual organs;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vepurisikāsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re manlike;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambhinnāsi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You have fistula;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatobyañjanāsīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re a hermaphrodite.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī ca hoti itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a woman, he perceives her as a woman, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ itthiyā vaccamaggaṁ passāvamaggaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati yācatipi āyācatipi pucchatipi paṭipucchatipi ācikkhatipi anusāsatipi akkosatipi, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to the anus or the vagina of the woman, praises, disparages, requests, implores, asks, enquires, describes, instructs, or abuses, he commits an offense entailing suspension. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">… (To be expanded as in [Saṅghādisesa 2](pli-tv-bu-vb-ss2:3.1.3--3.1.49), with appropriate substitutions.) … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve itthiyo dvinnaṁ itthīnaṁ itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is two women, he perceives them both as women, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ dvinnaṁ itthīnaṁ vaccamaggaṁ passāvamaggaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to the anus or the vagina of both women, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti dvinnaṁ saṅghādisesānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits two offenses entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… (To be expanded as in [Saṅghādisesa 2](pli-tv-bu-vb-ss2:3.2.4--3.2.36), with appropriate substitutions.) … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī ca paṇḍako ca ubhinnaṁ itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a woman and a _paṇḍaka_, but he perceives both as women, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ ubhinnaṁ vaccamaggaṁ passāvamaggaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to the anus or the vagina of both of them, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… (To be expanded as in [Saṅghādisesa 2](pli-tv-bu-vb-ss2:3.3.4--3.3.61), with appropriate substitutions.) … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī ca hoti itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a woman, he perceives her as a woman, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ itthiyā vaccamaggaṁ passāvamaggaṁ ṭhapetvā adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to any part of the woman below the collar bone but above the knees, apart from the anus or the vagina, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti thullaccayassa …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits a serious offense. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve itthiyo dvinnaṁ itthīnaṁ itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is two women, he perceives them both as women, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ dvinnaṁ itthīnaṁ vaccamaggaṁ passāvamaggaṁ ṭhapetvā adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to any part of both women below the collar bone but above the knees, apart from the anus or the vagina, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti dvinnaṁ thullaccayānaṁ …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits two serious offenses. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī ca paṇḍako ca ubhinnaṁ itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a woman and a _paṇḍaka_, but he perceives both as women, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ ubhinnaṁ vaccamaggaṁ passāvamaggaṁ ṭhapetvā adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to any part of both of them below the collar bone but above the knees, apart from the anus or the vagina, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti thullaccayena dukkaṭassa …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits one serious offense and one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī ca hoti itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a woman, he perceives her as a woman, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ itthiyā ubbhakkhakaṁ adhojāṇumaṇḍalaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to any part of the woman above the collar bone or below the knees, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti dukkaṭassa …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve itthiyo dvinnaṁ itthīnaṁ itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is two women, he perceives them both as women, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ dvinnaṁ itthīnaṁ ubbhakkhakaṁ adhojāṇumaṇḍalaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to any part of both women above the collar bone or below the knees, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī ca paṇḍako ca ubhinnaṁ itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a woman and a _paṇḍaka_, but he perceives both as women, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ ubhinnaṁ ubbhakkhakaṁ adhojāṇumaṇḍalaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to any part of both of them above the collar bone or below the knees, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī ca hoti itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a woman, he perceives her as a woman, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ itthiyā kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to anything connected to the woman’s body, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti dukkaṭassa …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve itthiyo dvinnaṁ itthīnaṁ itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is two women, he perceives them both as women, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ dvinnaṁ itthīnaṁ kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to anything connected to the body of both women, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī ca paṇḍako ca ubhinnaṁ itthisaññī sāratto ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a woman and a _paṇḍaka_, but he perceives both as women, and he has lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca naṁ ubhinnaṁ kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ ādissa vaṇṇampi bhaṇati avaṇṇampi bhaṇati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk, referring to anything connected to the body of both of them, praises, disparages … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkosatipi, āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">or abuses, he commits two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthapurekkhārassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is aiming at what is beneficial; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammapurekkhārassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is aiming at giving a teaching; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anusāsanipurekkhārassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is aiming at giving an instruction; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">3.1. Vinītavatthuuddānagāthā</span></p>
<p class="p3">Summary verses of case studies </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lohitaṁ kakkasākiṇṇaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Red, coarse, thick, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kharaṁ dīghañca vāpitaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Rough, long, sown; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci saṁsīdati maggo,</span></p>
<p class="p3">I hope the path has an end, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhā dānena kammunāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Faith, with a gift, with work.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">3.2. Vinītavatthu</span></p>
<p class="p3">Case studies </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī navarattaṁ kambalaṁ pārutā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain woman was wearing a newly dyed woolen cloak. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu sāratto taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lustful monk said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“lohitaṁ kho te, bhaginī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sister, is that red thing yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na paṭivijāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She did not understand and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāyya, navaratto kambalo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Venerable, it’s a newly dyed woolen cloak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi “bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ, kacci nu kho ahaṁ saṅghādisesaṁ āpattiṁ āpanno”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious and thought, “The Buddha has laid down a training rule. Could it be that I’ve committed an offense entailing suspension?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He told the Buddha, who said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anāpatti, bhikkhu, saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no offense entailing suspension, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but there’s an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī kharakambalaṁ pārutā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain woman was wearing a coarse woolen cloak. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu sāratto taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lustful monk said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kakkasalomaṁ kho te, bhaginī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sister, is that rough hair yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na paṭivijāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She did not understand and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāyya, kharakambalo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Venerable, it’s a coarse woolen cloak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anāpatti, bhikkhu, saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no offense entailing suspension, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but there’s an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī navāvutaṁ kambalaṁ pārutā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain woman was wearing a newly woven woolen cloak. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu sāratto taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lustful monk said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ākiṇṇalomaṁ kho te, bhaginī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sister, is that thick hair yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na paṭivijāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She did not understand and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāyya, navāvuto kambalo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Venerable, it’s a newly woven woolen cloak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anāpatti, bhikkhu, saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no offense entailing suspension, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but there’s an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī kharakambalakaṁ pārutā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain woman was wearing a coarse woolen cloak. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu sāratto taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lustful monk said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kharalomaṁ kho te, bhaginī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sister, is that coarse hair yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na paṭivijāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She did not understand and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāyya, kharakambalako”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Venerable, it’s a coarse woolen cloak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anāpatti, bhikkhu, saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no offense entailing suspension, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but there’s an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī pāvāraṁ pārutā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain woman was wearing a fleecy upper robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu sāratto taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lustful monk said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dīghalomaṁ kho te, bhaginī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sister, is that long hair yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na paṭivijāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She did not understand and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāyya, pāvāro”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Venerable, it’s a fleecy upper robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anāpatti, bhikkhu, saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no offense entailing suspension, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but there’s an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī khettaṁ vapāpetvā āgacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain woman was returning after having had a field sown. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu sāratto taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lustful monk said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vāpitaṁ kho te, bhaginī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Have you sown, Sister?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na paṭivijāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She did not understand and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāyya, no ca kho paṭivuttan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Venerable, but the furrow isn’t yet closed yet.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anāpatti, bhikkhu, saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no offense entailing suspension, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but there’s an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu paribbājikaṁ paṭipathe passitvā sāratto taṁ paribbājikaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a lustful monk saw a female wanderer coming in the opposite direction. He said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, bhagini, maggo saṁsīdatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sister, I hope the path has an end?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na paṭivijāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She did not understand and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āma, bhikkhu, paṭipajjissasī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, just keep going.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anāpatti, bhikkhu, saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no offense entailing suspension, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti thullaccayassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but there’s a serious offense.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sāratto aññataraṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a lustful monk said to a woman, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saddhāsi tvaṁ, bhagini.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You have faith, Sister, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca yaṁ sāmikassa desi taṁ nāmhākaṁ desī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">yet you don’t give us what you give your husband.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ, bhante”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s that, Venerable?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Methunadhamman”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sexual intercourse.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āpattiṁ tvaṁ, bhikkhu, āpanno saṅghādisesan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s an offense entailing suspension.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sāratto aññataraṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a lustful monk said to a woman, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saddhāsi tvaṁ, bhagini.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You have faith, Sister, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca yaṁ aggadānaṁ taṁ nāmhākaṁ desī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">yet you don’t give us the highest gift.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ, bhante, aggadānan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s that, Venerable?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Methunadhamman”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sexual intercourse.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āpattiṁ tvaṁ, bhikkhu, āpanno saṅghādisesan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s an offense entailing suspension.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī kammaṁ karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain woman was doing some work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu sāratto taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lustful monk said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tiṭṭha, bhagini, ahaṁ karissāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Stand, Sister, I’ll work.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nisīda, bhagini, ahaṁ karissāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sit, Sister, I’ll work.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nipajja, bhagini, ahaṁ karissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Lie down, Sister, I’ll work.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na paṭivijāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She did not understand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kukkuccaṁ ahosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">He became anxious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anāpatti, bhikkhu, saṅghādisesassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no offense entailing suspension, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but there’s an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullavācāsikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on indecent speech, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
