<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np25_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">25. Cīvaraacchindanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">25. The training rule on taking back robe-cloth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto bhātuno saddhivihārikaṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Upananda the Sakyan said to his brother’s student, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehāvuso, janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, let’s go wandering the country.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṁ, bhante, gamissāmi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I can’t, Venerable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbalacīvaromhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">my robes are worn.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ehāvuso, ahaṁ te cīvaraṁ dassāmī”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ll give you a robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa cīvaraṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he gave him a robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho so bhikkhu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards that monk heard </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavā kira janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that the Buddha was about to go wandering the country. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tassa bhikkhuno etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na dānāhaṁ āyasmatā upanandena sakyaputtena saddhiṁ janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissāmi, bhagavatā saddhiṁ janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now I’ll go wandering with the Buddha instead.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, when Upananda said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi dāni, āvuso, janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Let’s go,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṁ, bhante, tayā saddhiṁ janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissāmi, bhagavatā saddhiṁ janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he replied, “I’m not going with you, but with the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi tyāhaṁ, āvuso, cīvaraṁ adāsiṁ, mayā saddhiṁ janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissatī”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, that robe I gave you is going with me,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kupito anattamano acchindi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he just took it back in anger. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk told other monks what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the monks of few desires complained and criticized Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto bhikkhussa sāmaṁ cīvaraṁ datvā kupito anattamano acchindissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Upananda give away a robe and then take it back in anger?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, bhikkhussa sāmaṁ cīvaraṁ datvā kupito anattamano acchindī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, bhikkhussa sāmaṁ cīvaraṁ datvā kupito anattamano acchindissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhussa sāmaṁ cīvaraṁ datvā kupito anattamano acchindeyya vā acchindāpeyya vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk himself gives a robe to a monk, but then, in anger, takes it back or has it taken back, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhussāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To a monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa bhikkhussa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to another monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Himself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ datvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he himself has given it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ, vikappanupagaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robe-cloth, but not smaller than what can be transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kupito anattamanoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">In anger: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anabhiraddho āhatacitto khilajāto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">discontent, having hatred, hostile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchindeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Takes back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ acchindati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he takes it back himself, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchindāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has taken back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks another, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇatto bahukampi acchindati, nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he only asks once, then even if the other takes back many, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-cloth should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ bhikkhussa sāmaṁ datvā acchinnaṁ nissaggiyaṁ imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe-cloth, which I took back after giving it to a monk, is to be relinquished. I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe-cloth back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī cīvaraṁ datvā kupito anattamano acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained and he perceives them as such, and after giving them robe-cloth, he takes it back in anger or has it taken back, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko cīvaraṁ datvā kupito anattamano acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and after giving them robe-cloth, he takes it back in anger or has it taken back, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī cīvaraṁ datvā kupito anattamano acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but he does not perceive them as such, and after giving them robe-cloth, he takes it back in anger or has it taken back, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ parikkhāraṁ datvā kupito anattamano acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, after giving them another requisite, he takes it back in anger or has it taken back, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannassa cīvaraṁ vā aññaṁ vā parikkhāraṁ datvā kupito anattamano acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, after giving robe-cloth or another requisite to a person who is not fully ordained, he takes it back in anger or has it taken back, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so vā deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the other person gives it back; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa vā vissasanto gaṇhāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he takes it on trust from them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraacchindanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on taking back robe-cloth, the fifth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
