<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np4_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">4. Purāṇacīvarasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">4. The training rule on used robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato udāyissa purāṇadutiyikā bhikkhunīsu pabbajitā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Udāyī’s ex-wife became a nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā āyasmato udāyissa santike abhikkhaṇaṁ āgacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She frequently visited Udāyī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmāpi udāyī tassā bhikkhuniyā santike abhikkhaṇaṁ gacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he frequently visited her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā udāyī tassā bhikkhuniyā santike bhattavissaggaṁ karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And Udāyī shared his meals with that nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena sā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā tassā bhikkhuniyā purato aṅgajātaṁ vivaritvā āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One morning Udāyī robed up, took his bowl and robe, and went to her. He then uncovered his genitals in front of her and sat down on a seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāpi kho bhikkhunī āyasmato udāyissa purato aṅgajātaṁ vivaritvā āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She too uncovered her genitals in front of him and sat down on a seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī sāratto tassā bhikkhuniyā aṅgajātaṁ upanijjhāyi. Tassa asuci mucci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lustfully staring at her genitals, he emitted semen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī taṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then said to that nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gaccha, bhagini, udakaṁ āhara, antaravāsakaṁ dhovissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sister, get some water. I’ll wash the robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āharayya, ahameva dhovissāmī”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give it to me, Venerable, I’ll wash it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṁ asuciṁ ekadesaṁ mukhena aggahesi ekadesaṁ aṅgajāte pakkhipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She then took some of the semen in her mouth and inserted some into her vagina. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tena gabbhaṁ gaṇhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of that she became pregnant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abrahmacārinī ayaṁ bhikkhunī, gabbhinī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This nun doesn’t abstain from sex. She’s pregnant.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṁ, ayye, abrahmacārinī”ti bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She said, “Venerables, I do abstain from sex,” and she told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns complained and criticized Udāyī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyo udāyī bhikkhuniyā purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Udāyī get a nun to wash a used robe?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then told the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā udāyī bhikkhuniyā purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Udāyī get a nun to wash a used robe?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Udāyī: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, udāyi, bhikkhuniyā purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Udāyī, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ñātikā te, udāyi, aññātikā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is she a relative of yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātikā, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātako, moghapurisa, aññātikāya na jānāti patirūpaṁ vā appatirūpaṁ vā pāsādikaṁ vā apāsādikaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, a man and a woman who are unrelated don’t know what’s appropriate and inappropriate, what’s inspiring and uninspiring, in dealing with each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, aññātikāya bhikkhuniyā purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And still you did this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu aññātikāya bhikkhuniyā purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpeyya vā rajāpeyya vā ākoṭāpeyya vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has an unrelated nun wash, dye, or beat a used robe, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unrelated: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātito vā pitito vā yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā asambaddhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who is not a descendant of one’s male ancestors going back seven generations, either on the mother’s side or on the father’s side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purāṇacīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A used robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakiṁ nivatthampi sakiṁ pārutampi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a sarong or an upper robe, even worn once. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhovāti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells her to wash it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhotaṁ nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been washed, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rajāti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells her to dye it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattaṁ nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been dyed, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākoṭehīti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells her to beat it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ pāṇippahāraṁ vā muggarappahāraṁ vā dinne nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she has struck it once with her hand or with an implement, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṁ me, bhante, purāṇacīvaraṁ aññātikāya bhikkhuniyā dhovāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this used robe, which I got an unrelated nun to wash, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmīti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her wash a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpeti rajāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her wash and dye a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpeti ākoṭāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her wash and beat a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpeti rajāpeti ākoṭāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her wash, dye, and beat a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and two offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ rajāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her dye a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ rajāpeti ākoṭāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her dye and beat a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ rajāpeti dhovāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her dye and wash a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ rajāpeti ākoṭāpeti dhovāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her dye, beat, and wash a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and two offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ ākoṭāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her beat a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ ākoṭāpeti dhovāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her beat and wash a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ ākoṭāpeti rajāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her beat and dye a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī purāṇacīvaraṁ ākoṭāpeti dhovāpeti rajāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her beat, wash, and dye a used robe, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and two offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya vematiko …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated, but he is unsure of it … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññātikāya ñātikasaññī …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated, but he perceives her as related … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa purāṇacīvaraṁ dhovāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has her wash a used robe belonging to someone else, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdanapaccattharaṇaṁ dhovāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has her wash a sitting mat or a sheet, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoupasampannāya dhovāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has a nun who is fully ordained only on one side do the washing, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya aññātikasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related, but he perceives her as unrelated, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya ñātikasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related and he perceives her as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātikāya dhovantiyā aññātikā dutiyā hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a related nun does the washing and an unrelated nun helps her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avuttā dhovati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a nun does the washing without being asked; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aparibhuttaṁ dhovāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has a nun wash an unused robe; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvaraṁ ṭhapetvā aññaṁ parikkhāraṁ dhovāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has a nun wash any requisite apart from a robe; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhamānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a trainee nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇeriyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a novice nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purāṇacīvarasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on used robes, the fourth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
