<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np20_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on silk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">20. Kayavikkayasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">20. The training rule on bartering </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto paṭṭo hoti cīvarakammaṁ kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Upananda the Sakyan had become skilled at making robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So paṭapilotikānaṁ saṅghāṭiṁ karitvā surattaṁ suparikammakataṁ katvā pārupi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He made an upper robe of old cloth, well-dyed and beautifully executed, and he wore it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro paribbājako mahagghaṁ paṭaṁ pārupitvā yenāyasmā upanando sakyaputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then a certain wanderer who was wearing an expensive robe went up to Upananda and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sundarā kho tyāyaṁ, āvuso, saṅghāṭi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your upper robe is beautiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dehi me paṭenā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please give it to me in exchange for my robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jānāhi, āvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are you sure?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāvuso, jānāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Handāvuso”ti, adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “Alright, then,” he gave it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so paribbājako taṁ saṅghāṭiṁ pārupitvā paribbājakārāmaṁ agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The wanderer put on the upper robe and went to the wanderers’ monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribbājakā taṁ paribbājakaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the wanderers said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sundarā kho tyāyaṁ, āvuso, saṅghāṭi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This upper robe of yours is beautiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuto tayā laddhā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Where did you get it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena me, āvuso, paṭena parivattitā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I swapped it for my robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katihipi tyāyaṁ, āvuso, saṅghāṭi bhavissati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how long will it last? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">soyeva te paṭo varo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Your other robe was better.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so paribbājako—“saccaṁ kho paribbājakā āhaṁsu—‘katihipi myāyaṁ saṅghāṭi bhavissati. Soyeva me paṭo varo’”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The wanderer realized they were right, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yenāyasmā upanando sakyaputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and so he returned to Upananda and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handa te, āvuso, saṅghāṭi; dehi me paṭan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Here’s your upper robe. Please give me back mine.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu tvaṁ, āvuso, mayā vutto— ‘jānāhi, āvuso’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But didn’t I ask you if you were sure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṁ dassāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I won’t give it back.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so paribbājako ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that wanderer complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gihīpi naṁ gihissa vippaṭisārissa denti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Even householders give back to each other when they have regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kiṁ pana pabbajito pabbajitassa na dassatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How then can a monastic not do the same?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa paribbājakassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that wanderer, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto paribbājakena saddhiṁ kayavikkayaṁ samāpajjissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Upananda barter with a wanderer?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Upananda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, paribbājakena saddhiṁ kayavikkayaṁ samāpajjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, paribbājakena saddhiṁ kayavikkayaṁ samāpajjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu nānappakārakaṁ kayavikkayaṁ samāpajjeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk barters in various ways, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānappakārakaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Various ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārā, antamaso cuṇṇapiṇḍopi dantakaṭṭhampi dasikasuttampi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">robes, almsfood, a dwelling, or medicines; even a bit of bath powder, a tooth cleaner, or a piece of string. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kayavikkayaṁ samāpajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Barters: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iminā imaṁ dehi, iminā imaṁ āhara, iminā imaṁ parivattehi, iminā imaṁ cetāpehīti. Ajjhācarati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he misbehaves, saying, “Give that for this,” “Bring that for this,” “Swap that with this,” “Exchange that for this,” he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kayitañca hoti vikkayitañca attano bhaṇḍaṁ parahatthagataṁ parabhaṇḍaṁ attano hatthagataṁ, nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been bartered—his own goods are in the hands of the other and the other’s goods are in his own hands—it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The goods should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, they should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṁ, bhante, nānappakārakaṁ kayavikkayaṁ samāpajjiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, I have bartered in various ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṁ me nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kayavikkaye kayavikkayasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is bartering, and he perceives it as such, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kayavikkaye vematiko, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is bartering, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kayavikkaye nakayavikkayasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is bartering, but he does not perceive it as such, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nakayavikkaye kayavikkayasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not bartering, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nakayavikkaye vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not bartering, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nakayavikkaye nakayavikkayasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not bartering, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">agghaṁ pucchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks for the price; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kappiyakārakassa ācikkhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he tells an attendant; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ amhākaṁ atthi, amhākañca iminā ca iminā ca attho”ti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he says, “I have this and I have need of such-and-such;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kayavikkayasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on bartering, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyavaggo dutiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second sub-chapter on silk is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyā suddhadvebhāgā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Silk, entirely, two parts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chabbassāni nisīdanaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Six years, sitting mat; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve ca lomāni uggaṇhe,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And two on wool, should take, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho nānappakārakāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two on various ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
