<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.147-147. Asappurisadānasutta  - 147. Gifts of a Bad Person </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.147. 147. Asappurisadānasutta  - 147. Gifts of a Bad Person </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Tikaṇḍakīvagga  - 15. At Tikaṇḍakī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, asappurisadānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five gifts of a bad person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asakkaccaṃ deti, acittīkatvā deti, asahatthā deti, apaviddhaṃ deti, anāgamanadiṭṭhiko deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give carelessly. They give thoughtlessly. They don’t give with their own hand. They give the dregs. They give without consideration for consequences. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca asappurisadānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five gifts of a bad person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, sappurisadānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five gifts of a good person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkaccaṃ deti, cittīkatvā deti, sahatthā deti, anapaviddhaṃ deti, āgamanadiṭṭhiko deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give carefully. They give thoughtfully. They give with their own hand. They don’t give the dregs. They give with consideration for consequences. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca sappurisadānānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five gifts of a good person.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
