<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.144-144. Tikaṇḍakīsutta  - 144. At Tikaṇḍakī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.144. 144. Tikaṇḍakīsutta  - 144. At Tikaṇḍakī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Tikaṇḍakīvagga  - 15. At Tikaṇḍakī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sākete viharati tikaṇḍakīvane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāketa, in Tikaṇḍakī Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kālena kālaṃ appaṭikūle paṭikūlasaññī vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant would do well to meditate from time to time perceiving the following: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appaṭikūle paṭikūlasaññī vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the repulsive in the unrepulsive, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kālena kālaṃ paṭikūle appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the unrepulsive in the repulsive, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kālena kālaṃ appaṭikūle ca paṭikūle ca paṭikūlasaññī vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the repulsive in both the unrepulsive and the repulsive, and </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kālena kālaṃ paṭikūle ca appaṭikūle ca appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the unrepulsive in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kālena kālaṃ paṭikūlañca appaṭikūlañca tadubhayaṃ abhinivajjetvā upekkhako vihareyya sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant would do well to meditate from time to time staying equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca appaṭikūle paṭikūlasaññī vihareyya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mā me rajanīyesu dhammesu rāgo udapādī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May greed not arise in me for things that arouse greed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca appaṭikūle paṭikūlasaññī vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant should meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive for this reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca paṭikūle appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mā me dosanīyesu dhammesu doso udapādī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May hate not arise in me for things that provoke hate.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca paṭikūle appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca appaṭikūle ca paṭikūle ca paṭikūlasaññī vihareyya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the repulsive in both the unrepulsive and the repulsive? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mā me rajanīyesu dhammesu rāgo udapādi, mā me dosanīyesu dhammesu doso udapādī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May greed not arise in me for things that arouse greed. May hate not arise in me for things that provoke hate.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca appaṭikūle ca paṭikūle ca paṭikūlasaññī vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca paṭikūle ca appaṭikūle ca appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mā me dosanīyesu dhammesu doso udapādi, mā me rajanīyesu dhammesu rāgo udapādī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May hate not arise in me for things that provoke hate. May greed not arise in me for things that arouse greed.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca paṭikūle ca appaṭikūle ca appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca paṭikūlañca appaṭikūlañca tadubhayaṃ abhinivajjetvā upekkhako vihareyya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">For what reason should a mendicant meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sato sampajāno mā me kvacani katthaci kiñcanaṃ rajanīyesu dhammesu rāgo udapādi, mā me kvacani katthaci kiñcanaṃ dosanīyesu dhammesu doso udapādi, mā me kvacani katthaci kiñcanaṃ mohanīyesu dhammesu moho udapādī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May no greed for things that arouse greed, hate for things that provoke hate, or delusion for things that promote delusion arise in me in any way at all.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu atthavasaṃ paṭicca paṭikūlañca appaṭikūlañca tadubhayaṃ abhinivajjetvā upekkhako vihareyya sato sampajāno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For this reason a mendicant should meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
