<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.054-54. Samayasutta  - 54. Times Good for Meditation </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.054. 54. Samayasutta  - 54. Times Good for Meditation </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Nīvaraṇavagga  - 6. Hindrances </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, asamayā padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are five times that are not good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu jiṇṇo hoti jarāyābhibhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant is old, overcome with old age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo asamayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first time that’s not good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu byādhito hoti byādhinābhibhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant is sick, overcome by sickness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo asamayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second time that’s not good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, dubbhikkhaṃ hoti dussassaṃ dullabhapiṇḍaṃ, na sukaraṃ uñchena paggahena yāpetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, there’s a famine, a bad harvest, so it’s hard to get alms-food, and not easy to keep going by collecting alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo asamayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third time that’s not good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhayaṃ hoti aṭavisaṅkopo, cakkasamārūḷhā jānapadā pariyāyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, there’s peril from wild savages, and the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho asamayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth time that’s not good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, saṅgho bhinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, there’s a schism in the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe kho pana, bhikkhave, bhinne aññamaññaṃ akkosā ca honti, aññamaññaṃ paribhāsā ca honti, aññamaññaṃ parikkhepā ca honti, aññamaññaṃ pariccajā ca honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Saṅgha is split, they abuse, insult, block, and reject each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha appasannā ceva nappasīdanti, pasannānañca ekaccānaṃ aññathattaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This doesn’t inspire confidence in those without it, and it causes some with confidence to change their minds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamo asamayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth time that’s not good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca asamayā padhānāyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five times that are not good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, samayā padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are five times that are good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu daharo hoti yuvā susu kāḷakeso bhadrena yobbanena samannāgato paṭhamena vayasā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant is a youth, young, black-haired, blessed with youth, in the prime of life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo samayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first time that’s good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu appābādho hoti appātaṅko, samavepākiniyā gahaṇiyā samannāgato nātisītāya nāccuṇhāya majjhimāya padhānakkhamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, they are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo samayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second time that’s good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, subhikkhaṃ hoti susassaṃ sulabhapiṇḍaṃ, sukaraṃ uñchena paggahena yāpetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, there’s plenty of food, a good harvest, so it’s easy to get alms-food, and easy to keep going by collecting alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo samayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third time that’s good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, manussā samaggā sammodamānā avivadamānā khīrodakībhūtā aññamaññaṃ piyacakkhūhi sampassantā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, people live in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho samayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth time that’s good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃgho samaggo sammodamāno avivadamāno ekuddeso phāsu viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Saṅgha lives comfortably, in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, with one recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃghe kho pana, bhikkhave, samagge na ceva aññamaññaṃ akkosā honti, na ca aññamaññaṃ paribhāsā honti, na ca aññamaññaṃ parikkhepā honti, na ca aññamaññaṃ pariccajā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Saṅgha is in harmony, they don’t abuse, insult, block, or reject each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha appasannā ceva pasīdanti, pasannānañca bhiyyobhāvo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This inspires confidence in those without it, and increases confidence in those who have it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamo samayo padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth time that’s good for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca samayā padhānāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five times that are good for meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
