<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.157-157. Dukkathāsutta  - 157. Inappropriate Talk </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.157. 157. Dukkathāsutta  - 157. Inappropriate Talk </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Saddhammavagga  - 16. The True Teaching </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcannaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalānaṃ kathā dukkathā puggale puggalaṃ upanidhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are certain topics that are inappropriate to talk about, taking into consideration which specific one of five people you are talking to. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddhassa, bhikkhave, saddhākathā dukkathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dussīlassa sīlakathā dukkathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appassutassa bāhusaccakathā dukkathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maccharissa cāgakathā dukkathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duppaññassa paññākathā dukkathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, assaddhassa saddhākathā dukkathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddho, bhikkhave, saddhākathāya kacchamānāya abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an unfaithful person is spoken to about faith they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, saddhāsampadaṃ attani na samanupassati, na ca labhati tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not seeing that faith in themselves, they don’t get the rapture and joy that faith brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā assaddhassa saddhākathā dukkathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, dussīlassa sīlakathā dukkathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dussīlo, bhikkhave, sīlakathāya kacchamānāya abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an unethical person is spoken to about ethics they lose their temper … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, sīlasampadaṃ attani na samanupassati na ca labhati tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not seeing that ethical conduct in themselves, they don’t get the rapture and joy that ethical conduct brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā dussīlassa sīlakathā dukkathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, appassutassa bāhusaccakathā dukkathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about learning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appassuto, bhikkhave, bāhusaccakathāya kacchamānāya abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an unlearned person is spoken to about learning they lose their temper … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, sutasampadaṃ attani na samanupassati, na ca labhati tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not seeing that learning in themselves, they don’t get the rapture and joy that learning brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā appassutassa bāhusaccakathā dukkathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, maccharissa cāgakathā dukkathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maccharī, bhikkhave, cāgakathāya kacchamānāya abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an stingy person is spoken to about generosity they lose their temper … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, cāgasampadaṃ attani na samanupassati na ca labhati tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not seeing that generosity in themselves, they don’t get the rapture and joy that generosity brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā maccharissa cāgakathā dukkathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, duppaññassa paññākathā dukkathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duppañño, bhikkhave, paññākathāya kacchamānāya abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a witless person is spoken to about wisdom they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, paññāsampadaṃ attani na samanupassati, na ca labhati tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not seeing that wisdom in themselves, they don’t get the rapture and joy that wisdom brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā duppaññassa paññākathā dukkathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ puggalānaṃ kathā dukkathā puggale puggalaṃ upanidhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are topics that are inappropriate to talk about, taking into consideration which specific one of five people you are talking to. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcannaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalānaṃ kathā sukathā puggale puggalaṃ upanidhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are certain topics that are appropriate to talk about, taking into consideration which specific one of five people you are talking to. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhassa, bhikkhave, saddhākathā sukathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate to talk to a faithful person about faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlavato sīlakathā sukathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussutassa bāhusaccakathā sukathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate to talk to a learned person about learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cāgavato cāgakathā sukathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate to talk to a generous person about generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavato paññākathā sukathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate to talk to a wise person about wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, saddhassa saddhākathā sukathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it appropriate to talk to a faithful person about faith? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddho, bhikkhave, saddhākathāya kacchamānāya nābhisajjati na kuppati na byāpajjati na patitthīyati na kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a faithful person is spoken to about faith they don’t lose their temper, they don’t get annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, saddhāsampadaṃ attani samanupassati labhati ca tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing that faith in themselves, they get the rapture and joy that faith brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā saddhassa saddhākathā sukathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s appropriate to talk to a faithful person about faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, sīlavato sīlakathā sukathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical conduct? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavā, bhikkhave, sīlakathāya kacchamānāya nābhisajjati na kuppati na byāpajjati na patitthīyati na kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an ethical person is spoken to about ethical conduct they don’t lose their temper … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, sīlasampadaṃ attani samanupassati, labhati ca tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing that ethical conduct in themselves, they get the rapture and joy that ethical conduct brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā sīlavato sīlakathā sukathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, bahussutassa bāhusaccakathā sukathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it appropriate to talk to a learned person about learning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahussuto, bhikkhave, bāhusaccakathāya kacchamānāya nābhisajjati na kuppati na byāpajjati na patitthīyati na kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a learned person is spoken to about learning they don’t lose their temper … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, sutasampadaṃ attani samanupassati, labhati ca tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing that learning in themselves, they get the rapture and joy that learning brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā bahussutassa bāhusaccakathā sukathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s appropriate to talk to a learned person about learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, cāgavato cāgakathā sukathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it appropriate to talk to a generous person about generosity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cāgavā, bhikkhave, cāgakathāya kacchamānāya nābhisajjati na kuppati na byāpajjati na patitthīyati na kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a generous person is spoken to about generosity they don’t lose their temper … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, cāgasampadaṃ attani samanupassati, labhati ca tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing that generosity in themselves, they get the rapture and joy that generosity brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā cāgavato cāgakathā sukathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s appropriate to talk to a generous person about generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, paññavato paññākathā sukathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is it appropriate to talk to a wise person about wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññavā, bhikkhave, paññākathāya kacchamānāya nābhisajjati na kuppati na byāpajjati na patitthīyati na kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a wise person is spoken to about wisdom they don’t lose their temper, they don’t get annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi so, bhikkhave, paññāsampadaṃ attani samanupassati labhati ca tatonidānaṃ pītipāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing that wisdom in themselves, they get the rapture and joy that wisdom brings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā paññavato paññākathā sukathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it’s appropriate to talk to a wise person about wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ puggalānaṃ kathā sukathā puggale puggalaṃ upanidhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are topics that are appropriate to talk about, taking into consideration which specific one of five people you are talking to.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
