<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.114-114. Andhakavindasutta  - 114. At Andhakavinda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.114. 114. Andhakavindasutta  - 114. At Andhakavinda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Andhakavindavagga  - 12. At Andhakavinda </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā magadhesu viharati andhakavinde. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Magadhans at Andhakavinda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, ānanda, bhikkhū navā acirapabbajitā adhunāgatā imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ, te vo, ānanda, bhikkhū pañcasu dhammesu samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, those mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training should be encouraged, supported, and established in five things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesu pañcasu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Etha tumhe, āvuso, sīlavā hotha, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvutā viharatha ācāragocarasampannā aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvino, samādāya sikkhatha sikkhāpadesū’ti—iti pātimokkhasaṃvare samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should be encouraged, supported, and established in restraint in the monastic code: ‘Reverends, please be ethical. Live restrained in the code of conduct, conducting yourselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Etha tumhe, āvuso, indriyesu guttadvārā viharatha ārakkhasatino nipakkasatino, sārakkhitamānasā satārakkhena cetasā samannāgatā’ti—iti indriyasaṃvare samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should be encouraged, supported, and established in sense restraint: ‘Reverends, please live with sense doors guarded, mindfully alert and on guard, with protected mind, having a heart protected by mindfulness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Etha tumhe, āvuso, appabhassā hotha, bhasse pariyantakārino’ti—iti bhassapariyante samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should be encouraged, supported, and established in limiting their speech: ‘Reverends, please speak little. Put a limit on your speech.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Etha tumhe, āvuso, āraññikā hotha, araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevathā’ti—iti kāyavūpakāse samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should be encouraged, supported, and established in retreat: ‘Reverends, please live in the wilderness. Frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Etha tumhe, āvuso, sammādiṭṭhikā hotha sammādassanena samannāgatā’ti—iti sammādassane samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should be encouraged, supported, and established in right perspective: ‘Reverends, please hold right view and have right perspective.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te, ānanda, bhikkhū navā acirapabbajitā adhunāgatā imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ, te vo, ānanda, bhikkhū imesu pañcasu dhammesu samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training should be encouraged, supported, and established in these five things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
