<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.071-71. Paṭhamacetovimuttiphalasutta  - 71. Freedom of Heart is the Fruit (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.071. 71. Paṭhamacetovimuttiphalasutta  - 71. Freedom of Heart is the Fruit (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Yodhājīvavagga  - 8. Warriors </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā cetovimuttiphalā ca honti cetovimuttiphalānisaṃsā ca, paññāvimuttiphalā ca honti paññāvimuttiphalānisaṃsā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, have freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu asubhānupassī kāye viharati, āhāre paṭikūlasaññī, sabbaloke anabhiratasaññī, sabbasaṅkhāresu aniccānupassī, maraṇasaññā kho panassa ajjhattaṃ sūpaṭṭhitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well established the perception of their own death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā cetovimuttiphalā ca honti cetovimuttiphalānisaṃsā ca, paññāvimuttiphalā ca honti paññāvimuttiphalānisaṃsā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things, when developed and cultivated, have freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cetovimutto ca hoti paññāvimutto ca hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ‘bhikkhu ukkhittapaligho itipi, saṃkiṇṇaparikho itipi, abbūḷhesiko itipi, niraggaḷo itipi, ariyo pannaddhajo pannabhāro visaṃyutto itipi’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called a mendicant who has lifted up the cross-bar, filled in the trench, and pulled up the pillar; they’re unbarred, a noble one with banner and burden put down, detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ukkhittapaligho hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant lifted the cross-bar? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno avijjā pahīnā hoti ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has given up ignorance, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ukkhittapaligho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has lifted the cross-bar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saṃkiṇṇaparikho hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant filled in the trench? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno ponobhaviko jātisaṃsāro pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṃkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has given up transmigrating through births in future lives, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saṃkiṇṇaparikho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has filled in the trench. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu abbūḷhesiko hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant pulled up the pillar? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno taṇhā pahīnā hoti ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has given up craving, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu abbūḷhesiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has pulled up the pillar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu niraggaḷo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant unbarred? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni honti ucchinnamūlāni tālāvatthukatāni anabhāvaṅkatāni āyatiṃ anuppādadhammāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has given up the five lower fetters, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they’re unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu niraggaḷo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is unbarred. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyo pannaddhajo pannabhāro visaṃyutto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant a noble one with banner and burden put down, detached? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno asmimāno pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has given up the conceit ‘I am’, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyo pannaddhajo pannabhāro visaṃyutto hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is a noble one with banner and burden put down, detached.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
