<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.053-53. Padhāniyaṅgasutta  - 53. Factors That Support Meditation </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.053. 53. Padhāniyaṅgasutta  - 53. Factors That Support Meditation </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Nīvaraṇavagga  - 6. Hindrances </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, padhāniyaṅgāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five factors that support meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddho hoti, saddahati tathāgatassa bodhiṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appābādho hoti appātaṅko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are rarely ill or unwell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samavepākiniyā gahaṇiyā samannāgato nātisītāya nāccuṇhāya majjhimāya padhānakkhamāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṭho hoti amāyāvī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not devious or deceitful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathābhūtaṃ attānaṃ āvikattā satthari vā viññūsu vā sabrahmacārīsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya, thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavā hoti, udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca padhāniyaṅgānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five factors that support meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
