<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.234-234. Bahūpakārasutta  - 234. Very Helpful </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.234. 234. Bahūpakārasutta  - 234. Very Helpful </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">24. Āvāsikavagga  - 24. A Resident Mendicant </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato āvāsiko bhikkhu āvāsassa bahūpakāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is very helpful to the monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavā hoti … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re ethical, restrained in the code of conduct, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto hoti … pe … diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and understanding them with right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khaṇḍaphullaṃ paṭisaṅkharoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They repair what is decayed and damaged. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahā kho pana bhikkhusaṅgho abhikkanto nānāverajjakā bhikkhū gihīnaṃ upasaṅkamitvā āroceti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from abroad, they go to the lay people and announce: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mahā kho, āvuso, bhikkhusaṅgho abhikkanto nānāverajjakā bhikkhū, karotha puññāni, samayo puññāni kātun’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from abroad. Make merit! Now is the time to make merit!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato āvāsiko bhikkhu āvāsassa bahūpakāro hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A resident mendicant with these five qualities is very helpful to the monastery.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
