<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.112-112. Pacchāsamaṇasutta  - 112. An Ascetic to Follow Behind on Almsround </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.112. 112. Pacchāsamaṇasutta  - 112. An Ascetic to Follow Behind on Almsround </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Andhakavindavagga  - 12. At Andhakavinda </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato pacchāsamaṇo na ādātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you shouldn’t take an ascetic with five qualities to follow behind on almsround. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atidūre vā gacchati accāsanne vā, na pattapariyāpannaṃ gaṇhati, āpattisāmantā bhaṇamānaṃ na nivāreti, bhaṇamānassa antarantarā kathaṃ opāteti, duppañño hoti jaḷo eḷamūgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They walk too far away or too close behind. They don’t take your bowl when it’s full. They don’t warn you when your speech is bordering on an offense. They keep on interrupting while you’re speaking. And they’re witless, dull, and stupid. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato pacchāsamaṇo na ādātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You shouldn’t take an ascetic with these five qualities to follow behind on almsround. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato pacchāsamaṇo ādātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should take an ascetic with five qualities to follow behind on almsround. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nātidūre gacchati na accāsanne, pattapariyāpannaṃ gaṇhati, āpattisāmantā bhaṇamānaṃ nivāreti, bhaṇamānassa na antarantarā kathaṃ opāteti, paññavā hoti ajaḷo aneḷamūgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t walk too far away or too close behind. They take your bowl when it is full. They warn you when your speech is bordering on an offense. They don’t interrupt while you’re speaking. And they’re wise, bright, and clever. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato pacchāsamaṇo ādātabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should take an ascetic with these five qualities to follow behind on almsround.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
