<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.134-134. Yassaṃdisaṃsutta  - 134. In Whatever Region </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.134. 134. Yassaṃdisaṃsutta  - 134. In Whatever Region </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Rājavagga  - 14. Kings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato rājā khattiyo muddhāvasitto yassaṃ yassaṃ disāyaṃ viharati, sakasmiṃyeva vijite viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, with five factors an anointed aristocratic king lives in his own realm, no matter what region he lives in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rājā khattiyo muddhāvasitto ubhato sujāto hoti mātito ca pitito ca, saṃsuddhagahaṇiko, yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā akkhitto anupakkuṭṭho jātivādena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An anointed aristocratic king is well born on both his mother’s and father’s side, of pure descent, irrefutable and impeccable in questions of ancestry back to the seventh paternal generation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍho hoti mahaddhano mahābhogo paripuṇṇakosakoṭṭhāgāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is rich, affluent, and wealthy, with a full treasury and storehouses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">balavā kho pana hoti caturaṅginiyā senāya samannāgato assavāya ovādapaṭikarāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is powerful, having an army of four divisions that is obedient and carries out instructions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariṇāyako kho panassa hoti paṇḍito viyatto medhāvī paṭibalo atītānāgatapaccuppanne atthe cintetuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a counselor who is astute, competent, and intelligent, able to think issues through as they bear upon the past, future, and present. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassime cattāro dhammā yasaṃ paripācenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four things bring his fame to fruition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā yasapañcamena dhammena samannāgato yassaṃ yassaṃ disāyaṃ viharati, sakasmiṃyeva vijite viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With these five factors, including fame, an anointed aristocratic king lives in his own realm, no matter what direction he lives in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhetaṃ, bhikkhave, hoti vijitāvīnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because that is how it is for victors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu yassaṃ yassaṃ disāyaṃ viharati, vimuttacittova viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities lives with mind freed, no matter what region they live in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājāva khattiyo muddhāvasitto jātisampanno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is like the anointed aristocratic king’s impeccable lineage. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājāva khattiyo muddhāvasitto aḍḍho mahaddhano mahābhogo paripuṇṇakosakoṭṭhāgāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is like the anointed aristocratic king being rich, affluent, and wealthy, with full treasury and storehouses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājāva khattiyo muddhāvasitto balasampanno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is like the anointed aristocratic king having power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājāva khattiyo muddhāvasitto pariṇāyakasampanno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is like the anointed aristocratic king having a counselor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassime cattāro dhammā vimuttiṃ paripācenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four qualities bring their freedom to fruition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā vimuttipañcamena dhammena samannāgato yassaṃ yassaṃ disāyaṃ viharati vimuttacittova viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With these five qualities, including freedom, they live in their own realm, no matter what region they live in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhetaṃ, bhikkhave, hoti vimuttacittānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because that is how it is for those whose mind is free.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
