<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.063-63. Paṭhamavaḍḍhisutta  - 63. Growth (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.063. 63. Paṭhamavaḍḍhisutta  - 63. Growth (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Saññāvagga  - 7. Perceptions </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhamāno ariyasāvako ariyāya vaḍḍhiyā vaḍḍhati, sārādāyī ca hoti varādāyī ca kāyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a male noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāhi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhāya vaḍḍhati, sīlena vaḍḍhati, sutena vaḍḍhati, cāgena vaḍḍhati, paññāya vaḍḍhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāhi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhamāno ariyasāvako ariyāya vaḍḍhiyā vaḍḍhati, sārādāyī ca hoti varādāyī ca kāyassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A male noble disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddhāya sīlena ca yo pavaḍḍhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He who grows in faith and ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññāya cāgena sutena cūbhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wisdom, and both generosity and learning—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tādiso sappuriso vicakkhaṇo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a good man such as he sees clearly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādīyatī sāramidheva attano”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and takes on what is essential for himself in this life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
