<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.121-121. Gilānasutta  - 121. Sick </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.121. 121. Gilānasutta  - 121. Sick </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gilānavagga  - 13. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena gilānasālā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the infirmary, where </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā aññataraṃ bhikkhuṃ dubbalaṃ gilānakaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he saw a certain mendicant who was weak and sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">disvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He sat down on the seat spread out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kiñci, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṃ dubbalaṃ gilānakaṃ pañca dhammā na vijahanti, tassetaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if a weak and sick mendicant does not neglect five things, it can be expected that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nacirasseva āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they will soon realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu asubhānupassī kāye viharati, āhāre paṭikūlasaññī, sabbaloke anabhiratasaññī, sabbasaṅkhāresu aniccānupassī, maraṇasaññā kho panassa ajjhattaṃ sūpaṭṭhitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well established the perception of their own death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kiñci, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṃ dubbalaṃ gilānakaṃ ime pañca dhammā na vijahanti, tassetaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a weak and sick mendicant does not neglect these five things, it can be expected that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nacirasseva āsavānaṃ khayā … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja viharissatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they will soon realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
