<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.265-271-265–271. Aparadutiyajhānasuttādi  - 265–271. Another Discourse on the Second Absorption, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.265-271. 265–271. Aparadutiyajhānasuttādi  - 265–271. Another Discourse on the Second Absorption, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">26. Upasampadāvagga  - 26. Ordination </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhamme appahāya abhabbo dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ … tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ … sotāpattiphalaṃ … sakadāgāmiphalaṃ … anāgāmiphalaṃ … arahattaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can’t enter and remain in the second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption … or realize the fruit of stream-entry … the fruit of once-return … the fruit of non-return … perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āvāsamacchariyaṃ, kulamacchariyaṃ, lābhamacchariyaṃ, vaṇṇamacchariyaṃ, akataññutaṃ akataveditaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Stinginess with dwellings, families, material possessions, praise, and lack of gratitude and thankfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhamme appahāya abhabbo arahattaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without giving up these five qualities you can’t realize perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhamme pahāya bhabbo dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ … tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ … sotāpattiphalaṃ … sakadāgāmiphalaṃ … anāgāmiphalaṃ … arahattaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption … and realize the fruit of stream-entry … the fruit of once-return … the fruit of non-return … perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āvāsamacchariyaṃ, kulamacchariyaṃ, lābhamacchariyaṃ, vaṇṇamacchariyaṃ, akataññutaṃ akataveditaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Stinginess with dwellings, families, material possessions, praise, and lack of gratitude and thankfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhamme pahāya bhabbo arahattaṃ sacchikātun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up these five qualities you can realize perfection.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekavīsatimaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampadāvaggo chaṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
