<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.151-151. Paṭhamasammattaniyāmasutta  - 151. Inevitability Regarding the Right Path (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.151. 151. Paṭhamasammattaniyāmasutta  - 151. Inevitability Regarding the Right Path (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Saddhammavagga  - 16. The True Teaching </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato suṇantopi saddhammaṃ abhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ paribhoti, kathikaṃ paribhoti, attānaṃ paribhoti, vikkhittacitto dhammaṃ suṇāti, anekaggacitto ayoniso ca manasi karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They disparage the talk, the speaker, or themselves. They listen with distracted and scattered mind. They attend improperly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato suṇantopi saddhammaṃ abhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these five qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato suṇanto saddhammaṃ bhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kathaṃ paribhoti, na kathikaṃ paribhoti, na attānaṃ paribhoti, avikkhittacitto dhammaṃ suṇāti, ekaggacitto yoniso ca manasi karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t disparage the talk, the speaker, or themselves. They listen with undistracted and unified mind. They attend properly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato suṇanto saddhammaṃ bhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
