<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.161-161. Paṭhamaāghātapaṭivinayasutta  - 161. Getting Rid of Resentment (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.161. 161. Paṭhamaāghātapaṭivinayasutta  - 161. Getting Rid of Resentment (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Āghātavagga  - 17. Resentment </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, āghātapaṭivinayā yattha bhikkhuno uppanno āghāto sabbaso paṭivinetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant should use these five methods to completely get rid of resentment when it has arisen toward anyone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, puggale āghāto jāyetha, mettā tasmiṃ puggale bhāvetabbā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should develop love for a person you resent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ tasmiṃ puggale āghāto paṭivinetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to get rid of resentment for that person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, puggale āghāto jāyetha, karuṇā tasmiṃ puggale bhāvetabbā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should develop compassion for a person you resent. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ tasmiṃ puggale āghāto paṭivinetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, puggale āghāto jāyetha, upekkhā tasmiṃ puggale bhāvetabbā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should develop equanimity for a person you resent. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ tasmiṃ puggale āghāto paṭivinetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, puggale āghāto jāyetha, asatiamanasikāro tasmiṃ puggale āpajjitabbo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should disregard a person you resent, paying no attention to them. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ tasmiṃ puggale āghāto paṭivinetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, puggale āghāto jāyetha, kammassakatā tasmiṃ puggale adhiṭṭhātabbā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should apply the concept that we are the owners of our deeds to that person: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kammassako ayamāyasmā kammadāyādo kammayoni kammabandhu kammapaṭisaraṇo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This venerable is the owner of their deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are their womb, their relative, and their refuge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kammaṃ karissati kalyāṇaṃ vā pāpakaṃ vā tassa dāyādo bhavissatī’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They shall be the heir of whatever deeds they do, whether good or bad.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ tasmiṃ puggale āghāto paṭivinetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to get rid of resentment for that person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca āghātapaṭivinayā, yattha bhikkhuno uppanno āghāto sabbaso paṭivinetabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant should use these five methods to completely get rid of resentment when it has arisen toward anyone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
