<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.096-96. Sutadharasutta  - 96. Remembering What You’ve Learned </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.096. 96. Sutadharasutta  - 96. Remembering What You’ve Learned </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Kakudhavagga  - 10. With Kakudha </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu ānāpānassatiṃ āsevanto nacirasseva akuppaṃ paṭivijjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant cultivating mindfulness of breathing who has five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu appaṭṭho hoti appakicco subharo susantoso jīvitaparikkhāresu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is easily looked after and contented with life’s necessities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appāhāro hoti anodarikattaṃ anuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat little, not devoted to filling their stomach. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamiddho hoti jāgariyaṃ anuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to wakefulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathāvimuttaṃ cittaṃ paccavekkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They review the extent of their mind’s freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu ānāpānassatiṃ āsevanto nacirasseva akuppaṃ paṭivijjhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant cultivating mindfulness of breathing who has these five things will soon penetrate the unshakable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
