<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.050-50. Nāradasutta  - 50. With Nārada </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.050. 50. Nāradasutta  - 50. With Nārada </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Muṇḍarājavagga  - 5. With King Muṇḍa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā nārado pāṭaliputte viharati kukkuṭārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Nārada was staying at Pāṭaliputta, in the Chicken Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena muṇḍassa rañño bhaddā devī kālaṅkatā hoti piyā manāpā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time King Muṇḍa’s dear and beloved Queen Bhaddā had just passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhaddāya deviyā kālaṅkatāya piyāya manāpāya neva nhāyati na vilimpati na bhattaṃ bhuñjati na kammantaṃ payojeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And since that time, the king did not bathe, anoint himself, eat his meals, or apply himself to his work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattindivaṃ bhaddāya deviyā sarīre ajjhomucchito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Day and night he brooded over Queen Bhaddā’s corpse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho muṇḍo rājā piyakaṃ kosārakkhaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Muṇḍa addressed his treasurer, Piyaka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tena hi, samma piyaka, bhaddāya deviyā sarīraṃ āyasāya teladoṇiyā pakkhipitvā aññissā āyasāya doṇiyā paṭikujjatha, yathā mayaṃ bhaddāya deviyā sarīraṃ cirataraṃ passeyyāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, my good Piyaka, please place Queen Bhaddā’s corpse in an iron case filled with oil. Then close it up with another case, so that we can view Queen Bhaddā’s body even longer.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, devā”ti kho piyako kosārakkho muṇḍassa rañño paṭissutvā bhaddāya deviyā sarīraṃ āyasāya teladoṇiyā pakkhipitvā aññissā āyasāya doṇiyā paṭikujji. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Your Majesty,” replied Piyaka the treasurer, and he did as the king instructed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho piyakassa kosārakkhassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to Piyaka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imassa kho muṇḍassa rañño bhaddā devī kālaṅkatā piyā manāpā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“King Muṇḍa’s dear and beloved Queen Bhaddā has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhaddāya deviyā kālaṅkatāya piyāya manāpāya neva nhāyati na vilimpati na bhattaṃ bhuñjati na kammantaṃ payojeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Since then the king does not bathe, anoint himself, eat his meals, or apply himself to his work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattindivaṃ bhaddāya deviyā sarīre ajjhomucchito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Day and night he broods over Queen Bhaddā’s corpse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaṃ nu kho muṇḍo rājā samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā payirupāseyya, yassa dhammaṃ sutvā sokasallaṃ pajaheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, what ascetic or brahmin might the king pay homage to, whose teaching could help the king give up sorrow’s arrow?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho piyakassa kosārakkhassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to Piyaka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho āyasmā nārado pāṭaliputte viharati kukkuṭārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This Venerable Nārada is staying in the Chicken Monastery at Pāṭaliputta. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho panāyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇḍito viyatto medhāvī bahussuto cittakathī kalyāṇapaṭibhāno vuddho ceva arahā ca’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He is astute, competent, intelligent, learned, a brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature, a perfected one.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūna muṇḍo rājā āyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ payirupāseyya, appeva nāma muṇḍo rājā āyasmato nāradassa dhammaṃ sutvā sokasallaṃ pajaheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What if King Muṇḍa was to pay homage to Venerable Nārada? Hopefully when he hears Nārada’s teaching, the king could give up sorrow’s arrow.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho piyako kosārakkho yena muṇḍo rājā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā muṇḍaṃ rājānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Piyaka went to the king and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho, deva, āyasmā nārado pāṭaliputte viharati kukkuṭārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sire, this Venerable Nārada is staying in the Chicken Monastery at Pāṭaliputta. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho panāyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇḍito viyatto medhāvī bahussuto cittakathī kalyāṇapaṭibhāno vuddho ceva arahā ca’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He is astute, competent, intelligent, learned, a brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature, a perfected one.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi pana devo āyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ payirupāseyya, appeva nāma devo āyasmato nāradassa dhammaṃ sutvā sokasallaṃ pajaheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What if Your Majesty was to pay homage to Venerable Nārada? Hopefully when you hear Nārada’s teaching, you could give up sorrow’s arrow.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, samma piyaka, āyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ paṭivedehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, my good Piyaka, let Nārada know. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma mādiso samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā vijite vasantaṃ pubbe appaṭisaṃvidito upasaṅkamitabbaṃ maññeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For how could one such as I presume to visit an ascetic or brahmin in my realm without first letting them know?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, devā”ti kho piyako kosārakkho muṇḍassa rañño paṭissutvā yenāyasmā nārado tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho piyako kosārakkho āyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Your Majesty,” replied Piyaka the treasurer. He went to Nārada, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imassa, bhante, muṇḍassa rañño bhaddā devī kālaṅkatā piyā manāpā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, King Muṇḍa’s dear and beloved Queen Bhaddā has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhaddāya deviyā kālaṅkatāya piyāya manāpāya neva nhāyati na vilimpati na bhattaṃ bhuñjati na kammantaṃ payojeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And since she passed away, the king has not bathed, anointed himself, eaten his meals, or got his business done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattindivaṃ bhaddāya deviyā sarīre ajjhomucchito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Day and night he broods over Queen Bhaddā’s corpse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhante, āyasmā nārado muṇḍassa rañño tathā dhammaṃ desetu yathā muṇḍo rājā āyasmato nāradassa dhammaṃ sutvā sokasallaṃ pajaheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, please teach the king so that, when he hears your teaching, he can give up sorrow’s arrow.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassadāni, piyaka, muṇḍo rājā kālaṃ maññatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, Piyaka, let the king come when he likes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho piyako kosārakkho uṭṭhāyāsanā āyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā yena muṇḍo rājā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā muṇḍaṃ rājānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Piyaka got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled Venerable Nārada, keeping him on his right, before going to the king and saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katāvakāso kho, deva, āyasmatā nāradena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sire, the request for an audience with Venerable Nārada has been granted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassadāni devo kālaṃ maññatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Your Majesty, go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, samma piyaka, bhadrāni bhadrāni yānāni yojāpehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, my good Piyaka, harness the finest chariots.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, devā”ti kho piyako kosārakkho muṇḍassa rañño paṭissutvā bhadrāni bhadrāni yānāni yojāpetvā muṇḍaṃ rājānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Your Majesty,” replied Piyaka the treasurer. He did so, then told the king: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yuttāni kho te, deva, bhadrāni bhadrāni yānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassadāni devo kālaṃ maññatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Your Majesty, go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho muṇḍo rājā bhadraṃ yānaṃ abhiruhitvā bhadrehi bhadrehi yānehi yena kukkuṭārāmo tena pāyāsi mahaccā rājānubhāvena āyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Muṇḍa mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set out in full royal pomp to see Venerable Nārada at the Chicken Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatikā yānassa bhūmi yānena gantvā, yānā paccorohitvā pattikova ārāmaṃ pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on foot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho muṇḍo rājā yena āyasmā nārado tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho muṇḍaṃ rājānaṃ āyasmā nārado etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the king went up to Nārada, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then Nārada said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, mahārāja, alabbhanīyāni ṭhānāni samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, there are five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Jarādhammaṃ mā jīrī’ti alabbhanīyaṃ ṭhānaṃ samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That someone liable to old age should not grow old. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Byādhidhammaṃ mā byādhīyī’ti … pe … ‘maraṇadhammaṃ mā mīyī’ti … ‘khayadhammaṃ mā khīyī’ti … ‘nassanadhammaṃ mā nassī’ti alabbhanīyaṃ ṭhānaṃ samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That someone liable to sickness should not get sick. … That someone liable to death should not die. … That someone liable to ending should not end. … That someone liable to perishing should not perish. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assutavato, mahārāja, puthujjanassa jarādhammaṃ jīrati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An uneducated ordinary person has someone liable to old age who grows old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So jarādhamme jiṇṇe na iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t reflect on the nature of old age: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na kho mayhevekassa jarādhammaṃ jīrati, atha kho yāvatā sattānaṃ āgati gati cuti upapatti sabbesaṃ sattānaṃ jarādhammaṃ jīrati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s not just me who has someone liable to old age who grows old. For all sentient beings have someone liable to old age who grows old, as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana jarādhamme jiṇṇe soceyyaṃ kilameyyaṃ parideveyyaṃ, urattāḷiṃ kandeyyaṃ, sammohaṃ āpajjeyyaṃ, bhattampi me nacchādeyya, kāyepi dubbaṇṇiyaṃ okkameyya, kammantāpi nappavatteyyuṃ, amittāpi attamanā assu, mittāpi dummanā assū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to sorrow and pine and lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just because someone liable to old age grows old, I’d lose my appetite and my body would become ugly. My work wouldn’t get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So jarādhamme jiṇṇe socati kilamati paridevati, urattāḷiṃ kandati, sammohaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, when someone liable to old age grows old, they sorrow and pine and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahārāja: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘assutavā puthujjano viddho savisena sokasallena attānaṃyeva paritāpeti’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">an uneducated ordinary person struck by sorrow’s poisoned arrow, who only mortifies themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, mahārāja, assutavato puthujjanassa byādhidhammaṃ byādhīyati … pe … maraṇadhammaṃ mīyati … khayadhammaṃ khīyati … nassanadhammaṃ nassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, an uneducated ordinary person has someone liable to sickness … death … ending … perishing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So nassanadhamme naṭṭhe na iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t reflect on the nature of perishing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na kho mayhevekassa nassanadhammaṃ nassati, atha kho yāvatā sattānaṃ āgati gati cuti upapatti sabbesaṃ sattānaṃ nassanadhammaṃ nassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s not just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For all sentient beings have someone liable to perishing who perishes, as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana nassanadhamme naṭṭhe soceyyaṃ kilameyyaṃ parideveyyaṃ, urattāḷiṃ kandeyyaṃ, sammohaṃ āpajjeyyaṃ, bhattampi me nacchādeyya, kāyepi dubbaṇṇiyaṃ okkameyya, kammantāpi nappavatteyyuṃ, amittāpi attamanā assu, mittāpi dummanā assū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to sorrow and pine and lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just because someone liable to perishing perishes, I’d lose my appetite and my body would become ugly. My work wouldn’t get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So nassanadhamme naṭṭhe socati kilamati paridevati, urattāḷiṃ kandati, sammohaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they sorrow and pine and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahārāja: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘assutavā puthujjano viddho savisena sokasallena attānaṃyeva paritāpeti’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">an uneducated ordinary person struck by sorrow’s poisoned arrow, who only mortifies themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutavato ca kho, mahārāja, ariyasāvakassa jarādhammaṃ jīrati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An educated noble disciple has someone liable to old age who grows old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So jarādhamme jiṇṇe iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they reflect on the nature of old age: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na kho mayhevekassa jarādhammaṃ jīrati, atha kho yāvatā sattānaṃ āgati gati cuti upapatti sabbesaṃ sattānaṃ jarādhammaṃ jīrati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s not just me who has someone liable to old age who grows old. For all sentient beings have someone liable to old age who grows old, as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana jarādhamme jiṇṇe soceyyaṃ kilameyyaṃ parideveyyaṃ, urattāḷiṃ kandeyyaṃ, sammohaṃ āpajjeyyaṃ, bhattampi me nacchādeyya, kāyepi dubbaṇṇiyaṃ okkameyya, kammantāpi nappavatteyyuṃ, amittāpi attamanā assu, mittāpi dummanā assū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to sorrow and pine and lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just because someone liable to old age grows old, I’d lose my appetite and my body would become ugly. My work wouldn’t get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So jarādhamme jiṇṇe na socati na kilamati na paridevati, na urattāḷiṃ kandati, na sammohaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, when someone liable to old age grows old, they don’t sorrow and pine and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahārāja: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sutavā ariyasāvako abbuhi savisaṃ sokasallaṃ, yena viddho assutavā puthujjano attānaṃyeva paritāpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">an educated noble disciple who has drawn out sorrow’s poisoned arrow, struck by which uneducated ordinary people only mortify themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asoko visallo ariyasāvako attānaṃyeva parinibbāpeti’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sorrowless, free of thorns, that noble disciple only extinguishes themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, mahārāja, sutavato ariyasāvakassa byādhidhammaṃ byādhīyati … pe … maraṇadhammaṃ mīyati … khayadhammaṃ khīyati … nassanadhammaṃ nassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, an educated noble disciple has someone liable to sickness… death … ending … perishing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So nassanadhamme naṭṭhe iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they reflect on the nature of perishing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na kho mayhevekassa nassanadhammaṃ nassati, atha kho yāvatā sattānaṃ āgati gati cuti upapatti sabbesaṃ sattānaṃ nassanadhammaṃ nassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s not just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For all sentient beings have someone liable to perishing who perishes, as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana nassanadhamme naṭṭhe soceyyaṃ kilameyyaṃ parideveyyaṃ, urattāḷiṃ kandeyyaṃ, sammohaṃ āpajjeyyaṃ, bhattampi me nacchādeyya, kāyepi dubbaṇṇiyaṃ okkameyya, kammantāpi nappavatteyyuṃ, amittāpi attamanā assu, mittāpi dummanā assū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to sorrow and pine and lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just because someone liable to perishing perishes, I’d lose my appetite and my body would become ugly. My work wouldn’t get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So nassanadhamme naṭṭhe na socati na kilamati na paridevati, na urattāḷiṃ kandati, na sammohaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they don’t sorrow and pine and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahārāja: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sutavā ariyasāvako abbuhi savisaṃ sokasallaṃ, yena viddho assutavā puthujjano attānaṃyeva paritāpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">an educated noble disciple who has drawn out sorrow’s poisoned arrow, struck by which uneducated ordinary people only mortify themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asoko visallo ariyasāvako attānaṃyeva parinibbāpeti’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sorrowless, free of thorns, that noble disciple only extinguishes themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, mahārāja, pañca alabbhanīyāni ṭhānāni samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasminti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na socanāya paridevanāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sorrowing and lamenting </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthodha labbhā api appakopi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">doesn’t do even a little bit of good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Socantamenaṃ dukhitaṃ viditvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they know that you’re sad, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paccatthikā attamanā bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">your enemies are encouraged. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho paṇḍito āpadāsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an astute person doesn’t waver in the face of adversity, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na vedhatī atthavinicchayaññū; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as they’re able to assess what’s beneficial, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paccatthikāssa dukhitā bhavanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">their enemies suffer, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā mukhaṃ avikāraṃ purāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing that their normal expression doesn’t change. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jappena mantena subhāsitena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Chants, recitations, fine sayings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuppadānena paveṇiyā vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">charity or traditions: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā yattha labhetha atthaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">if by means of any such things you benefit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā tathā tattha parakkameyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then by all means keep doing them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace pajāneyya alabbhaneyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if you understand that ‘this good thing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayāva aññena vā esa attho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">can’t be had by me or by anyone else’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asocamāno adhivāsayeyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should accept it without sorrowing, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammaṃ daḷhaṃ kinti karomi dānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The karma is strong. What can I do now?’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, muṇḍo rājā āyasmantaṃ nāradaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, King Muṇḍa said to Venerable Nārada, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nāmo ayaṃ, bhante, dhammapariyāyo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sokasallaharaṇo nāma ayaṃ, mahārāja, dhammapariyāyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, this exposition of the teaching is called ‘Pulling Out Sorrow’s Arrow’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha, bhante, sokasallaharaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, sir, this is the pulling out of sorrow’s arrow! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imañhi me, bhante, dhammapariyāyaṃ sutvā sokasallaṃ pahīnan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hearing this exposition of the teaching, I’ve given up sorrow’s arrow.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho muṇḍo rājā piyakaṃ kosārakkhaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Muṇḍa addressed his treasurer, Piyaka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tena hi, samma piyaka, bhaddāya deviyā sarīraṃ jhāpetha; thūpañcassā karotha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, my good Piyaka, cremate Queen Bhaddā’s corpse and build a monument. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjatagge dāni mayaṃ nhāyissāma ceva vilimpissāma bhattañca bhuñjissāma kammante ca payojessāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, I will bathe, anoint myself, eat my meals, and apply myself to my work.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muṇḍarājavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādiyo sappuriso iṭṭhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manāpadāyībhisandaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sampadā ca dhanaṃ ṭhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosalo nāradena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamo paṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
