<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.159-159. Udāyīsutta  - 159. With Udāyī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.159. 159. Udāyīsutta  - 159. With Udāyī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Saddhammavagga  - 16. The True Teaching </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosambiyaṃ viharati ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā udāyī mahatiyā gihiparisāya parivuto dhammaṃ desento nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time Venerable Udāyī was sitting teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly of laypeople. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ udāyiṃ mahatiyā gihiparisāya parivutaṃ dhammaṃ desentaṃ nisinnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, Venerable Ānanda </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āyasmā, bhante, udāyī mahatiyā gihiparisāya parivuto dhammaṃ desetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Venerable Udāyī is teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly of laypeople.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, ānanda, sukaraṃ paresaṃ dhammaṃ desetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, it’s not easy to teach Dhamma to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paresaṃ, ānanda, dhammaṃ desentena pañca dhamme ajjhattaṃ upaṭṭhāpetvā paresaṃ dhammo desetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should establish five things in yourself before teaching Dhamma to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Anupubbiṃ kathaṃ kathessāmī’ti paresaṃ dhammo desetabbo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should teach Dhamma to others thinking: ‘I will teach step by step.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pariyāyadassāvī kathaṃ kathessāmī’ti paresaṃ dhammo desetabbo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I will teach explaining my methods.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anuddayataṃ paṭicca kathaṃ kathessāmī’ti paresaṃ dhammo desetabbo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I will teach out of kindness.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na āmisantaro kathaṃ kathessāmī’ti paresaṃ dhammo desetabbo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I will not teach while secretly hoping to profit.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘attānañca parañca anupahacca kathaṃ kathessāmī’ti paresaṃ dhammo desetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I will teach without hurting myself or others.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho, ānanda, sukaraṃ paresaṃ dhammaṃ desetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy to teach Dhamma to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paresaṃ, ānanda, dhammaṃ desentena ime pañca dhamme ajjhattaṃ upaṭṭhāpetvā paresaṃ dhammo desetabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should establish these five things in yourself before teaching Dhamma to others.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
