<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.109-109. Cātuddisasutta  - 109. All Four Directions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.109. 109. Cātuddisasutta  - 109. All Four Directions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Phāsuvihāravagga  - 11. Living Comfortably </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu cātuddiso hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities has all four directions covered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santuṭṭho hoti itarītaracīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re content with any kind of robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi, kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu cātuddiso hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these five qualities has all four directions covered.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
