<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.009-9. Paṭhamaagāravasutta  - 9. Disrespect (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.009. 9. Paṭhamaagāravasutta  - 9. Disrespect (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sekhabalavagga  - 1. Powers of a Trainee </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu agāravo appatisso cavati, nappatiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with five qualities fails, and doesn’t establish themselves in the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu agāravo appatisso cavati, nappatiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A disrespectful and irreverent mendicant who is faithless … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahiriko, bhikkhave, bhikkhu agāravo appatisso cavati, nappatiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">shameless … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anottappī, bhikkhave, bhikkhu agāravo appatisso cavati, nappatiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">imprudent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kusīto, bhikkhave, bhikkhu agāravo appatisso cavati, nappatiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">lazy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duppañño, bhikkhave, bhikkhu agāravo appatisso cavati, nappatiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">witless fails, and doesn’t establish themselves in the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu agāravo appatisso cavati, nappatiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with these five qualities fails, and doesn’t establish themselves in the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sagāravo sappatisso na cavati, patiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A respectful and reverent mendicant with five qualities doesn’t fail, and establishes themselves in the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sagāravo sappatisso na cavati, patiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A respectful and reverent mendicant who is faithful … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hirīmā, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sagāravo sappatisso na cavati, patiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">conscientious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ottappī, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sagāravo sappatisso na cavati, patiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">prudent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraddhavīriyo, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sagāravo sappatisso na cavati, patiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">energetic … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññavā, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sagāravo sappatisso na cavati, patiṭṭhāti saddhamme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wise doesn’t fail, and establishes themselves in the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sagāravo sappatisso na cavati, patiṭṭhāti saddhamme”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A respectful and reverent mendicant with these five qualities doesn’t fail, and establishes themselves in the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
