<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.231-231. Āvāsikasutta  - 231. A Resident Mendicant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.231. 231. Āvāsikasutta  - 231. A Resident Mendicant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">24. Āvāsikavagga  - 24. A Resident Mendicant </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato āvāsiko bhikkhu abhāvanīyo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is not admirable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ākappasampanno hoti na vattasampanno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not accomplished in being well-presented and doing their duties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na bahussuto hoti na sutadharo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not very learned and don’t remember what they’ve learned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na paṭisallekhitā hoti na paṭisallānārāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not self-effacing and don’t enjoy self-effacement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kalyāṇavāco hoti na kalyāṇavākkaraṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not a good speaker and don’t speak well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duppañño hoti jaḷo eḷamūgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re witless, dull, and stupid. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato āvāsiko bhikkhu abhāvanīyo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A resident mendicant with these five qualities is not admirable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato āvāsiko bhikkhu bhāvanīyo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A resident mendicant with these five qualities is admirable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākappasampanno hoti vattasampanno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re accomplished in being well-presented and doing their duties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto hoti sutadharo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very learned and remember what they’ve learned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭisallekhitā hoti paṭisallānārāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re self-effacing and enjoy self-effacement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇavāco hoti kalyāṇavākkaraṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re a good speaker and speak well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavā hoti ajaḷo aneḷamūgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re wise, bright, and clever. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato āvāsiko bhikkhu bhāvanīyo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A resident mendicant with these five qualities is admirable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
