<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.042-42. Sappurisasutta  - 42. A Good Person </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.042. 42. Sappurisasutta  - 42. A Good Person </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Muṇḍarājavagga  - 5. With King Muṇḍa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sappuriso, bhikkhave, kule jāyamāno bahuno janassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a good person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāpitūnaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the benefit, welfare, and happiness of mother and father; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puttadārassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">children and partners; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāsakammakaraporisassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">bondservants, workers, and staff; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mittāmaccānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">friends and colleagues; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ascetics and brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahāmegho sabbasassāni sampādento bahuno janassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a great rain cloud, which nourishes all the crops for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, sappuriso kule jāyamāno bahuno janassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a good person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāpitūnaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puttadārassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāsakammakaraporisassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mittāmaccānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hotīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hito bahunnaṃ paṭipajja bhoge, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gods protect one who is guarded by principle, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ devatā rakkhati dhammaguttaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who uses their wealth for the welfare of the many. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahussutaṃ sīlavatūpapannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who is learned, with precepts and observances intact, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme ṭhitaṃ na vijahati kitti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and steady in principle, doesn’t lose their reputation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaṭṭhaṃ sīlasampannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saccavādiṃ hirīmanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">truthful, conscientious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhaṃ jambonadasseva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a coin of mountain gold: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko taṃ ninditumarahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who is worthy of criticizing them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devāpi naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even the gods praise them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmunāpi pasaṃsito”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and by Brahmā, too, they’re praised.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
