<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.049-49. Kosalasutta  - 49. The King of Kosala </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.049. 49. Kosalasutta  - 49. The King of Kosala </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Muṇḍarājavagga  - 5. With King Muṇḍa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena mallikā devī kālaṅkatā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro puriso yena rājā pasenadi kosalo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā rañño pasenadissa kosalassa upakaṇṇake āroceti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a man went up to the king and whispered in his ear, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mallikā devī, deva, kālaṅkatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your Majesty, Queen Mallikā has passed away.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, rājā pasenadi kosalo dukkhī dummano pattakkhandho adhomukho pajjhāyanto appaṭibhāno nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, King Pasenadi was miserable and sad. He sat with his shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ dukkhiṃ dummanaṃ pattakkhandhaṃ adhomukhaṃ pajjhāyantaṃ appaṭibhānaṃ viditvā rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing this, the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pañcimāni, mahārāja, alabbhanīyāni ṭhānāni samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, there are five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Jarādhammaṃ mā jīrī’ti alabbhanīyaṃ ṭhānaṃ … pe … na socanāya paridevanāya … pe … kammaṃ daḷhaṃ kinti karomi dānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That someone liable to old age should not grow old. … Sorrowing and lamenting doesn’t do even a little bit of good … ‘The karma is strong. What can I do now?’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
