<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.294-302-294–302. Nigaṇṭhasuttādi  - 294–302. A Nigaṇṭha, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.294-302. 294–302. Nigaṇṭhasuttādi  - 294–302. A Nigaṇṭha, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">28. Sikkhāpadapeyyāla  - 28. Abbreviated Texts on Training Rules </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato nigaṇṭho … muṇḍasāvako … jaṭilako … paribbājako … māgaṇḍiko … tedaṇḍiko … āruddhako … gotamako … devadhammiko yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A Jain … disciple of the shavelings … a matted-hair ascetic … a wanderer … a follower of Māgaṇḍiya … a trident-bearing ascetic … a follower of the unobstructed … a follower of Gotama … one who performs rituals for the gods … with five qualities is cast down to hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātī hoti, adinnādāyī hoti … pe … surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhāyī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, and use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato devadhammiko yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With these five qualities they’re cast down to hell.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattarasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhāpadapeyyālaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
