<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.073-73. Paṭhamadhammavihārīsutta  - 73. One Who Lives by the Teaching (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.073. 73. Paṭhamadhammavihārīsutta  - 73. One Who Lives by the Teaching (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Yodhājīvavagga  - 8. Warriors </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘dhammavihārī, dhammavihārī’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘one who lives by the teaching’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, bhikkhu dhammavihārī hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is one who lives by the teaching defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, bhikkhu dhammaṃ pariyāpuṇāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ, geyyaṃ, veyyākaraṇaṃ, gāthaṃ, udānaṃ, itivuttakaṃ, jātakaṃ, abbhutadhammaṃ, vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tāya dhammapariyattiyā divasaṃ atināmeti, riñcati paṭisallānaṃ, nānuyuñjati ajjhattaṃ cetosamathaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They spend their days studying that teaching. But they neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu: ‘bhikkhu pariyattibahulo, no dhammavihārī’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That mendicant is called one who studies a lot, not one who lives by the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhu, bhikkhu yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena paresaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tāya dhammapaññattiyā divasaṃ atināmeti, riñcati paṭisallānaṃ, nānuyuñjati ajjhattaṃ cetosamathaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They spend their days advocating that teaching. But they neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu: ‘bhikkhu paññattibahulo, no dhammavihārī’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That mendicant is called one who advocates a lot, not one who lives by the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhu, bhikkhu yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena sajjhāyaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena sajjhāyena divasaṃ atināmeti, riñcati paṭisallānaṃ, nānuyuñjati ajjhattaṃ cetosamathaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They spend their days reciting that teaching. But they neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu: ‘bhikkhu sajjhāyabahulo, no dhammavihārī’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That mendicant is called one who recites a lot, not one who lives by the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhu, bhikkhu yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ cetasā anuvitakketi anuvicāreti manasānupekkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi dhammavitakkehi divasaṃ atināmeti, riñcati paṭisallānaṃ, nānuyuñjati ajjhattaṃ cetosamathaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They spend their days thinking about that teaching. But they neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu: ‘bhikkhu vitakkabahulo, no dhammavihārī’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That mendicant is called one who thinks a lot, not one who lives by the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhu, bhikkhu dhammaṃ pariyāpuṇāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ, geyyaṃ, veyyākaraṇaṃ, gāthaṃ, udānaṃ, itivuttakaṃ, jātakaṃ, abbhutadhammaṃ, vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tāya dhammapariyattiyā na divasaṃ atināmeti, nāpi riñcati paṭisallānaṃ, anuyuñjati ajjhattaṃ cetosamathaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t spend their days studying that teaching. They don’t neglect retreat, and they’re committed to internal serenity of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, bhikkhu dhammavihārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is one who lives by the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhu, desito mayā pariyattibahulo, desito paññattibahulo, desito sajjhāyabahulo, desito vitakkabahulo, desito dhammavihārī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, mendicant, I’ve taught you the one who studies a lot, the one who advocates a lot, the one who recites a lot, the one who thinks a lot, and the one who lives by the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, bhikkhu, satthārā karaṇīyaṃ sāvakānaṃ hitesinā anukampakena anukampaṃ upādāya, kataṃ vo taṃ mayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Out of compassion, I’ve done what a teacher should do who wants what’s best for their disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etāni, bhikkhu, rukkhamūlāni, etāni suññāgārāni. Jhāyatha, bhikkhu, mā pamādattha, mā pacchā vippaṭisārino ahuvattha. Ayaṃ vo amhākaṃ anusāsanī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here are these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicant! Don’t be negligent! Don’t regret it later! This is my instruction to you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
