<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.199-199. Kulasutta  - 199. Families </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.199. 199. Kulasutta  - 199. Families </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 20. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ, bhikkhave, sīlavanto pabbajitā kulaṃ upasaṅkamanti, tattha manussā pañcahi ṭhānehi bahuṃ puññaṃ pasavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When ethical renunciates come to a family, the people make much merit for five reasons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye sīlavante pabbajite kulaṃ upasaṅkamante manussā disvā cittāni pasādenti, saggasaṃvattanikaṃ, bhikkhave, taṃ kulaṃ tasmiṃ samaye paṭipadaṃ paṭipannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they see ethical renunciates coming to their family, the people bring up confidence in their hearts. At that time the family is practicing a path leading to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye sīlavante pabbajite kulaṃ upasaṅkamante manussā paccuṭṭhenti abhivādenti āsanaṃ denti, uccākulīnasaṃvattanikaṃ, bhikkhave, taṃ kulaṃ tasmiṃ samaye paṭipadaṃ paṭipannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people rise from their seats, bow down, and offer them a seat. At that time the family is practicing a path leading to a birth in an eminent family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye sīlavante pabbajite kulaṃ upasaṅkamante manussā maccheramalaṃ paṭivinenti, mahesakkhasaṃvattanikaṃ, bhikkhave, taṃ kulaṃ tasmiṃ samaye paṭipadaṃ paṭipannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people get rid of the stain of stinginess. At that time the family is practicing a path leading to being illustrious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye sīlavante pabbajite kulaṃ upasaṅkamante manussā yathāsatti yathābalaṃ saṃvibhajanti, mahābhogasaṃvattanikaṃ, bhikkhave, taṃ kulaṃ tasmiṃ samaye paṭipadaṃ paṭipannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people share what they have as best they can. At that time the family is practicing a path leading to great wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye sīlavante pabbajite kulaṃ upasaṅkamante manussā paripucchanti paripañhanti dhammaṃ suṇanti, mahāpaññāsaṃvattanikaṃ, bhikkhave, taṃ kulaṃ tasmiṃ samaye paṭipadaṃ paṭipannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people ask questions and listen to the teachings. At that time the family is practicing a path leading to great wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, sīlavanto pabbajitā kulaṃ upasaṅkamanti, tattha manussā imehi pañcahi ṭhānehi bahuṃ puññaṃ pasavantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ethical renunciates come to a family, the people make much merit for these five reasons.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
