<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.031-31. Sumanasutta  - 31. With Sumanā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.031. 31. Sumanasutta  - 31. With Sumanā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sumanavagga  - 4. With Sumanā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ … pe … anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sumanā rājakumārī pañcahi rathasatehi pañcahi rājakumārisatehi parivutā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho sumanā rājakumārī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Princess Sumanā, escorted by five hundred chariots and five hundred royal maidens, went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhassu, bhante, bhagavato dve sāvakā samasaddhā samasīlā samapaññā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, suppose there were two disciples equal in faith, ethics, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eko dāyako, eko adāyako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One is a giver, one is not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devabhūtānaṃ pana nesaṃ, bhante, siyā viseso, siyā nānākaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have become gods, would there be any distinction or difference between them?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā, sumane”ti bhagavā avoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There would be, Sumanā,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo so, sumane, dāyako so amuṃ adāyakaṃ devabhūto samāno pañcahi ṭhānehi adhigaṇhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As a god, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in five respects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dibbena āyunā, dibbena vaṇṇena, dibbena sukhena, dibbena yasena, dibbena ādhipateyyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">divine lifespan, beauty, happiness, fame, and sovereignty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, sumane, dāyako so amuṃ adāyakaṃ devabhūto samāno imehi pañcahi ṭhānehi adhigaṇhāti”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As a god, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in these five respects.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace pana te, bhante, tato cutā itthattaṃ āgacchanti, manussabhūtānaṃ pana nesaṃ, bhante, siyā viseso, siyā nānākaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, if they pass away from there and come back to this state of existence as human beings, would there still be any distinction or difference between them?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā, sumane”ti bhagavā avoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There would be, Sumanā,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo so, sumane, dāyako so amuṃ adāyakaṃ manussabhūto samāno pañcahi ṭhānehi adhigaṇhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As a human being, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in five respects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mānusakena āyunā, mānusakena vaṇṇena, mānusakena sukhena, mānusakena yasena, mānusakena ādhipateyyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">human lifespan, beauty, happiness, fame, and sovereignty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, sumane, dāyako so amuṃ adāyakaṃ manussabhūto samāno imehi pañcahi ṭhānehi adhigaṇhāti”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As a human being, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in these five respects.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace pana te, bhante, ubho agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti, pabbajitānaṃ pana nesaṃ, bhante, siyā viseso, siyā nānākaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, if they both go forth from the lay life to homelessness, would there still be any distinction or difference between them?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā, sumane”ti bhagavā avoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There would be, Sumanā,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo so, sumane, dāyako so amuṃ adāyakaṃ pabbajito samāno pañcahi ṭhānehi adhigaṇhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As a renunciate, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in five respects. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yācitova bahulaṃ cīvaraṃ paribhuñjati appaṃ ayācito, yācitova bahulaṃ piṇḍapātaṃ paribhuñjati appaṃ ayācito, yācitova bahulaṃ senāsanaṃ paribhuñjati appaṃ ayācito, yācitova bahulaṃ gilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkhāraṃ paribhuñjati appaṃ ayācito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d usually use only what they’ve been invited to accept—robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick—rarely using them without invitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yehi kho pana sabrahmacārīhi saddhiṃ viharati tyassa manāpeneva bahulaṃ kāyakammena samudācaranti appaṃ amanāpena, manāpeneva bahulaṃ vacīkammena samudācaranti appaṃ amanāpena, manāpeneva bahulaṃ manokammena samudācaranti appaṃ amanāpena, manāpaṃyeva bahulaṃ upahāraṃ upaharanti appaṃ amanāpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When living with other spiritual practitioners, they usually treat them agreeably by way of body, speech, and mind, rarely disagreeably. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, sumane, dāyako so amuṃ adāyakaṃ pabbajito samāno imehi pañcahi ṭhānehi adhigaṇhātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As a renunciate, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in these five respects.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace pana te, bhante, ubho arahattaṃ pāpuṇanti, arahattappattānaṃ pana nesaṃ, bhante, siyā viseso, siyā nānākaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, if they both attain perfection, as perfected ones would there still be any distinction or difference between them?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ettha kho panesāhaṃ, sumane, na kiñci nānākaraṇaṃ vadāmi, yadidaṃ vimuttiyā vimuttin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, I say there is no difference between the freedom of one and the freedom of the other.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvañcidaṃ, bhante, alameva dānāni dātuṃ alaṃ puññāni kātuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just this much is quite enough to justify giving gifts and making merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yatra hi nāma devabhūtassāpi upakārāni puññāni, manussabhūtassāpi upakārāni puññāni, pabbajitassāpi upakārāni puññānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For merit is helpful for those who have become gods, human beings, and renunciates.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, sumane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, Sumanā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alañhi, sumane, dānāni dātuṃ alaṃ puññāni kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s quite enough to justify giving gifts and making merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devabhūtassāpi upakārāni puññāni, manussabhūtassāpi upakārāni puññāni, pabbajitassāpi upakārāni puññānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For merit is helpful for those who have become gods, human beings, and renunciates.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathāpi cando vimalo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The moon so immaculate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gacchaṃ ākāsadhātuyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">journeying across the dimension of space; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe tārāgaṇe loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">outshines with its radiance </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ābhāya atirocati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">all the world’s stars. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatheva sīlasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So too, a faithful individual, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddho purisapuggalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">perfect in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe maccharino loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">outshines with their generosity </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cāgena atirocati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">all the world’s stingy people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāpi megho thanayaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The thundering rain cloud, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vijjumālī satakkaku; </span></p>
<p class="p3">its hundred peaks wreathed in lightning, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thalaṃ ninnañca pūreti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">pours down over the rich earth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhivassaṃ vasundharaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">soaking the plains and lowlands. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dassanasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even so, an astute person accomplished in vision, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsambuddhasāvako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a disciple of the fully awakened Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Macchariṃ adhigaṇhāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">surpasses a stingy person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcaṭhānehi paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in five respects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyunā yasasā ceva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">long life and fame, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṇṇena ca sukhena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">beauty and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve bhogaparibyūḷho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Blessed with riches, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pecca sagge pamodatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they depart to rejoice in heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
