<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.200-200. Nissāraṇīyasutta  - 200. Elements of Escape </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.200. 200. Nissāraṇīyasutta  - 200. Elements of Escape </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 20. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimā, bhikkhave, nissāraṇīyā dhātuyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five elements of escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno kāmaṃ manasikaroto kāmesu cittaṃ na pakkhandati nappasīdati na santiṭṭhati na vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a case where a mendicant focuses on sensual pleasures, but their mind isn’t eager, confident, settled, and decided about them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhammaṃ kho panassa manasikaroto nekkhamme cittaṃ pakkhandati pasīdati santiṭṭhati vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they focus on renunciation, their mind is eager, confident, settled, and decided about it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ cittaṃ sugataṃ subhāvitaṃ suvuṭṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ suvisaṃyuttaṃ kāmehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed, and well detached from sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca kāmapaccayā uppajjanti āsavā vighātapariḷāhā, mutto so tehi, na so taṃ vedanaṃ vediyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of sensual pleasures, so they don’t experience that kind of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamakkhātaṃ kāmānaṃ nissaraṇaṃ. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how the escape from sensual pleasures is explained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno byāpādaṃ manasikaroto byāpāde cittaṃ na pakkhandati nappasīdati na santiṭṭhati na vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another case where a mendicant focuses on ill will, but their mind isn’t eager … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abyāpādaṃ kho panassa manasikaroto abyāpāde cittaṃ pakkhandati pasīdati santiṭṭhati vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they focus on good will, their mind is eager … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ cittaṃ sugataṃ subhāvitaṃ suvuṭṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ suvisaṃyuttaṃ byāpādena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their mind is in a good state … well detached from ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca byāpādapaccayā uppajjanti āsavā vighātapariḷāhā, mutto so tehi, na so taṃ vedanaṃ vediyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of ill will, so they don’t experience that kind of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamakkhātaṃ byāpādassa nissaraṇaṃ. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how the escape from ill will is explained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno vihesaṃ manasikaroto vihesāya cittaṃ na pakkhandati nappasīdati na santiṭṭhati na vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another case where a mendicant focuses on harming, but their mind isn’t eager … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avihesaṃ kho panassa manasikaroto avihesāya cittaṃ pakkhandati pasīdati santiṭṭhati vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they focus on compassion, their mind is eager … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ cittaṃ sugataṃ subhāvitaṃ suvuṭṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ suvisaṃyuttaṃ vihesāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their mind is in a good state … well detached from harming. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca vihesāpaccayā uppajjanti āsavā vighātapariḷāhā, mutto so tehi, na so taṃ vedanaṃ vediyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of harming, so they don’t experience that kind of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamakkhātaṃ vihesāya nissaraṇaṃ. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how the escape from harming is explained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno rūpaṃ manasikaroto rūpe cittaṃ na pakkhandati nappasīdati na santiṭṭhati na vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another case where a mendicant focuses on form, but their mind isn’t eager … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpaṃ kho panassa manasikaroto arūpe cittaṃ pakkhandati pasīdati santiṭṭhati vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they focus on the formless, their mind is eager … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ cittaṃ sugataṃ subhāvitaṃ suvuṭṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ suvisaṃyuttaṃ rūpehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their mind is in a good state … well detached from forms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca rūpapaccayā uppajjanti āsavā vighātapariḷāhā, mutto so tehi, na so taṃ vedanaṃ vediyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of form, so they don’t experience that kind of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamakkhātaṃ rūpānaṃ nissaraṇaṃ. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how the escape from forms is explained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno sakkāyaṃ manasikaroto sakkāye cittaṃ na pakkhandati nappasīdati na santiṭṭhati na vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a case where a mendicant focuses on identity, but their mind isn’t eager, confident, settled, and decided about it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkāyanirodhaṃ kho panassa manasikaroto sakkāyanirodhe cittaṃ pakkhandati pasīdati santiṭṭhati vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they focus on the ending of identity, their mind is eager, confident, settled, and decided about it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ cittaṃ sugataṃ subhāvitaṃ suvuṭṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ suvisaṃyuttaṃ sakkāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed, and well detached from identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca sakkāyapaccayā uppajjanti āsavā vighātapariḷāhā, mutto so tehi, na so taṃ vedanaṃ vediyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of identity, so they don’t experience that kind of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamakkhātaṃ sakkāyassa nissaraṇaṃ. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how the escape from identity is explained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kāmanandīpi nānuseti, byāpādanandīpi nānuseti, vihesānandīpi nānuseti, rūpanandīpi nānuseti, sakkāyanandīpi nānuseti so kāmanandiyāpi ananusayā, byāpādanandiyāpi ananusayā, vihesānandiyāpi ananusayā, rūpanandiyāpi ananusayā, sakkāyanandiyāpi ananusayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Delight in sensual pleasures, ill will, harming, form, and identity don’t linger within them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu niranusayo, acchecchi taṇhaṃ, vivattayi saṃyojanaṃ, sammā mānābhisamayā antamakāsi dukkhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why they’re called a mendicant who is without underlying tendencies, who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, pañca nissāraṇīyā dhātuyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five elements of escape.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brāhmaṇavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Soṇo doṇo saṅgāravo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāraṇapālī ca piṅgiyānī; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Supinā ca vassā vācā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulaṃ nissāraṇīyena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catuttho paṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
