<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.124-124. Dutiyaupaṭṭhākasutta  - 124. A Carer (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.124. 124. Dutiyaupaṭṭhākasutta  - 124. A Carer (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gilānavagga  - 13. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato gilānupaṭṭhāko nālaṃ gilānaṃ upaṭṭhātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a carer with five qualities is not competent to care for a patient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nappaṭibalo hoti bhesajjaṃ saṃvidhātuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re unable to prepare medicine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappāyāsappāyaṃ na jānāti, asappāyaṃ upanāmeti, sappāyaṃ apanāmeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t know what is suitable and unsuitable, so they supply what is unsuitable and remove what is suitable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmisantaro gilānaṃ upaṭṭhāti, no mettacitto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They care for the sick for the sake of material benefits, not out of love. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jegucchī hoti uccāraṃ vā passāvaṃ vā vantaṃ vā kheḷaṃ vā nīharituṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re disgusted to remove feces, urine, vomit, or spit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nappaṭibalo hoti gilānaṃ kālena kālaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassetuṃ samādapetuṃ samuttejetuṃ sampahaṃsetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re unable to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the patient with a Dhamma talk from time to time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato gilānupaṭṭhāko nālaṃ gilānaṃ upaṭṭhātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A carer with these five qualities is not competent to care for a patient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato gilānupaṭṭhāko alaṃ gilānaṃ upaṭṭhātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A carer with five qualities is competent to care for a patient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭibalo hoti bhesajjaṃ saṃvidhātuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re able to prepare medicine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappāyāsappāyaṃ jānāti, asappāyaṃ apanāmeti, sappāyaṃ upanāmeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know what is suitable and unsuitable, so they remove what is unsuitable and supply what is suitable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mettacitto gilānaṃ upaṭṭhāti, no āmisantaro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They care for the sick out of love, not for the sake of material benefits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajegucchī hoti uccāraṃ vā passāvaṃ vā vantaṃ vā kheḷaṃ vā nīharituṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not disgusted to remove feces, urine, vomit, or spit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibalo hoti gilānaṃ kālena kālaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassetuṃ samādapetuṃ samuttejetuṃ sampahaṃsetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re able to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the patient with a Dhamma talk from time to time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato gilānupaṭṭhāko alaṃ gilānaṃ upaṭṭhātun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A carer with these five qualities is competent to care for a patient.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
