<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.030-30. Nāgitasutta  - 30. With Nāgita </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.030. 30. Nāgitasutta  - 30. With Nāgita </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Pañcaṅgikavagga  - 3. With Five Factors </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu cārikaṃ caramāno mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ yena icchānaṅgalaṃ nāma kosalānaṃ brāhmaṇagāmo tadavasari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Icchānaṅgala. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra sudaṃ bhagavā icchānaṅgale viharati icchānaṅgalavanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He stayed in a forest near Icchānaṅgala. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṃ kho icchānaṅgalakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“samaṇo khalu bho gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito icchānaṅgalaṃ anuppatto; icchānaṅgale viharati icchānaṅgalavanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Icchānaṅgala. He is staying in a forest near Icchānaṅgala. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho pana bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi, satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ lokaṃ sadevakaṃ samārakaṃ sabrahmakaṃ sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiṃ pajaṃ sadevamanussaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho pana tathārūpānaṃ arahataṃ dassanaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good to see such perfected ones.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho icchānaṅgalakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā tassā rattiyā accayena pahūtaṃ khādanīyaṃ bhojanīyaṃ ādāya yena icchānaṅgalavanasaṇḍo tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bahidvārakoṭṭhake aṭṭhaṃsu uccāsaddamahāsaddā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, when the night had passed, they took many different foods and went to the forest near Icchānaṅgala, where they stood outside the gates making a dreadful racket. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā nāgito bhagavato upaṭṭhāko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time Venerable Nāgita was the Buddha’s attendant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ nāgitaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Nāgita, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ke pana kho, nāgita, uccāsaddamahāsaddā, kevaṭṭā maññe macchavilope”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nāgita, who’s making that dreadful racket? You’d think it was fishermen hauling in a catch!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ete, bhante, icchānaṅgalakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā pahūtaṃ khādanīyaṃ bhojanīyaṃ ādāya bahidvārakoṭṭhake ṭhitā bhagavantaññeva uddissa bhikkhusaṃghañcā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, it’s these brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala. They’ve brought many different foods, and they’re standing outside the gates wanting to offer it specially to the Buddha and the mendicant Saṅgha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Māhaṃ, nāgita, yasena samāgamaṃ, mā ca mayā yaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, nāgita, nayimassa nekkhammasukhassa pavivekasukhassa upasamasukhassa sambodhasukhassa nikāmalābhī assa akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, yassāhaṃ nekkhammasukhassa pavivekasukhassa upasamasukhassa sambodhasukhassa nikāmalābhī akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are those who can’t get the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of awakening when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ mīḷhasukhaṃ middhasukhaṃ lābhasakkārasilokasukhaṃ sādiyeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them enjoy the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Adhivāsetu dāni, bhante, bhagavā, adhivāsetu sugato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Blessed One please relent now! May the Holy One relent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhivāsanakālo dāni, bhante, bhagavato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now is the time for the Buddha to relent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena yeneva dāni bhagavā gamissati taṃninnāva gamissanti brāhmaṇagahapatikā negamā ceva jānapadā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever the Buddha now goes, the brahmins and householders will incline the same way, as will the people of town and country. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, thullaphusitake deve vassante yathāninnaṃ udakāni pavattanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like when it rains heavily and the water flows downhill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhante, yena yeneva dāni bhagavā gamissati, taṃninnāva gamissanti brāhmaṇagahapatikā negamā ceva jānapadā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, wherever the Buddha now goes, the brahmins and householders will incline the same way, as will the people of town and country. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā hi, bhante, bhagavato sīlapaññāṇan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of the Buddha’s ethics and wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Māhaṃ, nāgita, yasena samāgamaṃ, mā ca mayā yaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, nāgita, nayimassa nekkhammasukhassa pavivekasukhassa upasamasukhassa sambodhasukhassa nikāmalābhī assa akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, yassāhaṃ nekkhammasukhassa pavivekasukhassa upasamasukhassa sambodhasukhassa nikāmalābhī akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are those who can’t get the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of awakening when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ mīḷhasukhaṃ middhasukhaṃ lābhasakkārasilokasukhaṃ sādiyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them enjoy the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asitapītakhāyitasāyitassa kho, nāgita, uccārapassāvo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">What you eat, drink, chew, and taste ends up as excrement and urine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eso tassa nissando. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its outcome. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyānaṃ kho, nāgita, vipariṇāmaññathābhāvā uppajjanti sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When loved ones decay and perish, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eso tassa nissando. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its outcome. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asubhanimittānuyogaṃ anuyuttassa kho, nāgita, subhanimitte pāṭikulyatā saṇṭhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When you pursue meditation on the feature of ugliness, revulsion at the feature of beauty becomes stabilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eso tassa nissando. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its outcome. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chasu kho, nāgita, phassāyatanesu aniccānupassino viharato phasse pāṭikulyatā saṇṭhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When you meditate observing impermanence in the six fields of contact, revulsion at contact becomes stabilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eso tassa nissando. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its outcome. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcasu kho, nāgita, upādānakkhandhesu udayabbayānupassino viharato upādāne pāṭikulyatā saṇṭhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When you meditate observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates, revulsion at grasping becomes stabilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eso tassa nissando”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its outcome.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcaṅgikavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve agāravupakkilesā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dussīlānuggahitena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttisamādhipañcaṅgikā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṅkamaṃ nāgitena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
