<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.223-223. Atinivāsasutta  - 223. Overstaying </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.223. 223. Atinivāsasutta  - 223. Overstaying </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">23. Dīghacārikavagga  - 23. Long Wandering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā atinivāse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of overstaying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahubhaṇḍo hoti bahubhaṇḍasannicayo, bahubhesajjo hoti bahubhesajjasannicayo, bahukicco hoti bahukaraṇīyo byatto kiṅkaraṇīyesu, saṃsaṭṭho viharati gahaṭṭhapabbajitehi ananulomikena gihisaṃsaggena, tamhā ca āvāsā pakkamanto sāpekkho pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You have a lot of stuff and store it up. You have a lot of medicine and store it up. You have a lot of duties and responsibilities, and become capable in whatever needs to be done. You mix closely with laypeople and renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. And when you leave that monastery, you miss it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ādīnavā atinivāse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five drawbacks of overstaying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, ānisaṃsā samavatthavāse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five benefits of staying for a reasonable length of time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na bahubhaṇḍo hoti na bahubhaṇḍasannicayo, na bahubhesajjo hoti na bahubhesajjasannicayo, na bahukicco hoti na bahukaraṇīyo na byatto kiṅkaraṇīyesu, asaṃsaṭṭho viharati gahaṭṭhapabbajitehi ananulomikena gihisaṃsaggena, tamhā ca āvāsā pakkamanto anapekkho pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You don’t have a lot of stuff and store it up. You don’t have a lot of medicine and store it up. You don’t have a lot of duties and responsibilities, or become capable in whatever needs to be done. You don’t mix closely with laypeople and renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. And when you leave that monastery, you don’t miss it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā samavatthavāse”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five benefits of staying for a reasonable length of time.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
