<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.179-179. Gihisutta  - 179. A Layperson </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.179. 179. Gihisutta  - 179. A Layperson </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Upāsakavagga  - 18. A Lay Follower </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati pañcamattehi upāsakasatehi parivuto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, escorted by around five hundred lay followers, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yaṃ kañci, sāriputta, jāneyyātha gihiṃ odātavasanaṃ pañcasu sikkhāpadesu saṃvutakammantaṃ catunnaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhiṃ akicchalābhiṃ akasiralābhiṃ, so ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You should know this, Sāriputta, about those white-clothed laypeople whose actions are restrained in the five precepts, and who get four blissful meditations in the present life belonging to the higher mind when they want, without trouble or difficulty. They may, if they wish, declare of themselves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesu pañcasu sikkhāpadesu saṃvutakammanto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the five precepts in which their actions are restrained? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, sāriputta, ariyasāvako pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti, musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesu pañcasu sikkhāpadesu saṃvutakammanto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five precepts in which their actions are restrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the four blissful meditations in the present life belonging to the higher mind that they get when they want, without trouble or difficulty? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, sāriputta, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi, satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamassa paṭhamo ābhicetasiko diṭṭhadhammasukhavihāro adhigato hoti avisuddhassa cittassa visuddhiyā apariyodātassa cittassa pariyodapanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first blissful meditation in the present life belonging to the higher mind, which they achieve in order to purify the unpurified mind and cleanse the unclean mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, ariyasāvako dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamassa dutiyo ābhicetasiko diṭṭhadhammasukhavihāro adhigato hoti avisuddhassa cittassa visuddhiyā apariyodātassa cittassa pariyodapanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second blissful meditation … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, ariyasāvako saṅghe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho ujuppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho ñāyappaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho sāmīcippaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, yadidaṃ cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, straightforward, methodical, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamassa tatiyo ābhicetasiko diṭṭhadhammasukhavihāro adhigato hoti avisuddhassa cittassa visuddhiyā apariyodātassa cittassa pariyodapanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third blissful meditation … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, ariyasāvako ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi acchiddehi asabalehi akammāsehi bhujissehi viññuppasatthehi aparāmaṭṭhehi samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple’s ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamassa catuttho ābhicetasiko diṭṭhadhammasukhavihāro adhigato hoti avisuddhassa cittassa visuddhiyā apariyodātassa cittassa pariyodapanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth blissful meditation in the present life belonging to the higher mind, which they achieve in order to purify the unpurified mind and cleanse the unclean mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ catunnaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four blissful meditations in the present life belonging to the higher mind that they get when they want, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kañci, sāriputta, jāneyyātha gihiṃ odātavasanaṃ—imesu pañcasu sikkhāpadesu saṃvutakammantaṃ, imesañca catunnaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhiṃ akicchalābhiṃ akasiralābhiṃ, so ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should know this, Sāriputta, about those white-clothed laypeople whose actions are restrained in the five precepts, and who get four blissful meditations in the present life belonging to the higher mind when they want, without trouble or difficulty. They may, if they wish, declare of themselves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirayesu bhayaṃ disvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing the peril in the hells, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpāni parivajjaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should shun bad deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyadhammaṃ samādāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking up the teaching of the noble ones, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇḍito parivajjaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">an astute person should shun them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hiṃse pāṇabhūtāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You shouldn’t harm living beings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vijjamāne parakkame; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as far as that’s possible to do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musā ca na bhaṇe jānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor should you knowingly speak falsehood, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adinnaṃ na parāmase. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or take what is not given. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sehi dārehi santuṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Content with your own partners, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paradārañca ārame; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should stay away from the partners of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Merayaṃ vāruṇiṃ jantu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man shouldn’t drink liquor or wine, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na pive cittamohaniṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as they confuse the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anussareyya sambuddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should recollect the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammañcānuvitakkaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and reflect on the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abyāpajjaṃ hitaṃ cittaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should develop a harmless mind of welfare, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devalokāya bhāvaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">which leads to the realms of gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upaṭṭhite deyyadhamme, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When suitable gifts to give are available </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puññatthassa jigīsato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to someone who wants and needs merit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santesu paṭhamaṃ dinnā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a religious donation is abundant </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vipulā hoti dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">if given first to the peaceful ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santo have pavakkhāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will tell of the peaceful ones, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāriputta suṇohi me; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta, listen to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kaṇhāsu setāsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Cows may be black or white, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rohiṇīsu harīsu vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">red or tawny, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammāsāsu sarūpāsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">mottled or uniform, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gosu pārevatāsu vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or pigeon-colored. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāsu kāsuci etāsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when one is born among them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">danto jāyati puṅgavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the bull that’s tamed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhorayho balasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">—a behemoth, powerful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇajavanikkamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">well-paced in pulling forward—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tameva bhāre yuñjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they yoke the load just to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāssa vaṇṇaṃ parikkhare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">regardless of his color. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So it is for humans, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yasmiṃ kismiñci jātiye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever they may be born, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khattiye brāhmaṇe vesse, </span></p>
<p class="p3">—among aristocrats, brahmins, merchants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sudde caṇḍālapukkuse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">workers, or outcastes and scavengers—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāsu kāsuci etāsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">but when one is born among them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">danto jāyati subbato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">tamed, true to their vows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaṭṭho sīlasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saccavādī hirīmano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">truthful, conscientious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahīnajātimaraṇo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve given up birth and death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacariyassa kevalī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and have completed the spiritual journey. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pannabhāro visaṃyutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With burden put down, detached, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katakicco anāsavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve completed the task and are free of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāragū sabbadhammānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gone beyond all things, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupādāya nibbuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re extinguished by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiñca viraje khette, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In that flawless field, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vipulā hoti dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a religious donation is abundant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bālā ca avijānantā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fools who don’t understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dummedhā assutāvino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">—stupid, uneducated—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahiddhā dadanti dānāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">give their gifts to those outside, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na hi sante upāsare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and don’t attend the peaceful ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca sante upāsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those who do attend the peaceful ones </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappaññe dhīrasammate; </span></p>
<p class="p3">—wise, esteemed as sages—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhā ca nesaṃ sugate, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and whose faith in the Holy One </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mūlajātā patiṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">has roots planted deep, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devalokañca te yanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they go to the realm of the gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kule vā idha jāyare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or are born here in a good family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupubbena nibbānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gradually those astute ones </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhigacchanti paṇḍitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">reach extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
