<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.155-155. Dutiyasaddhammasammosasutta  - 155. The Decline of the True Teaching (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.155. 155. Dutiyasaddhammasammosasutta  - 155. The Decline of the True Teaching (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Saddhammavagga  - 16. The True Teaching </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhammā saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhū dhammaṃ na pariyāpuṇanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when the mendicants don’t memorize the teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ, geyyaṃ, veyyākaraṇaṃ, gāthaṃ, udānaṃ, itivuttakaṃ, jātakaṃ, abbhutadhammaṃ, vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ na vitthārena paresaṃ desenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants don’t explain the teaching in detail to others as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ na vitthārena paraṃ vācenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants don’t make others recite the teaching in detail as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ na vitthārena sajjhāyaṃ karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants don’t recite the teaching in detail as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ na cetasā anuvitakkenti anuvicārenti manasānupekkhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants don’t think about and consider the teaching in their hearts, examining it with their minds as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhammā saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhammā saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhū dhammaṃ pariyāpuṇanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when the mendicants memorize the teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ, geyyaṃ, veyyākaraṇaṃ, gāthaṃ, udānaṃ, itivuttakaṃ, jātakaṃ, abbhutadhammaṃ, vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena paresaṃ desenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants explain the teaching in detail to others as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena paraṃ vācenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants make others recite the teaching in detail as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena sajjhāyaṃ karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants recite the teaching in detail as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ cetasā anuvitakkenti anuvicārenti manasānupekkhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants think about and consider the teaching in their hearts, examining it with their minds as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhammā saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
