<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.033-33. Uggahasutta  - 33. With Uggaha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.033. 33. Uggahasutta  - 33. With Uggaha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sumanavagga  - 4. With Sumanā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bhaddiye viharati jātiyā vane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Bhaddiya, in Jātiyā Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uggaho meṇḍakanattā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho uggaho meṇḍakanattā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Uggaha, Meṇḍaka’s grandson, went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Adhivāsetu me, bhante, bhagavā svātanāya attacatuttho bhattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please accept tomorrow’s meal from me, together with three other monks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uggaho meṇḍakanattā bhagavato adhivāsanaṃ viditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Uggaha got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassā rattiyā accayena pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena uggahassa meṇḍakanattuno nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then when the night had passed, the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to Uggaha’s home, where he sat on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uggaho meṇḍakanattā bhagavantaṃ paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappesi sampavāresi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Uggaha served and satisfied the Buddha with his own hands with a variety of delicious foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uggaho meṇḍakanattā bhagavantaṃ bhuttāviṃ onītapattapāṇiṃ ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Uggaha sat down to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho uggaho meṇḍakanattā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imā me, bhante, kumāriyo patikulāni gamissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, these girls of mine will be going to their husbands’ families. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovadatu tāsaṃ, bhante, bhagavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Buddha please advise </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anusāsatu tāsaṃ, bhante, bhagavā, yaṃ tāsaṃ assa dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and instruct them. It will be for their lasting welfare and happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tā kumāriyo etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to those girls: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tasmātiha, kumāriyo, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, girls, you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yassa vo mātāpitaro bhattuno dassanti atthakāmā hitesino anukampakā anukampaṃ upādāya, tassa bhavissāma pubbuṭṭhāyiniyo pacchānipātiniyo kiṃkārapaṭissāviniyo manāpacāriniyo piyavādiniyo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Our parents will give us to a husband wanting what’s best, out of kindness and compassion. We will get up before him and go to bed after him, and be obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, kumāriyo, sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, kumāriyo, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, girls, you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye te bhattu garuno bhavissanti mātāti vā pitāti vā samaṇabrāhmaṇāti vā, te sakkarissāma garuṃ karissāma mānessāma pūjessāma abbhāgate ca āsanodakena paṭipūjessāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Those our husband respects—mother and father, ascetics and brahmins—we will honor, respect, revere, and venerate, and serve with a seat and a drink when they come as guests.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, kumāriyo, sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, kumāriyo, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, girls, you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye te bhattu abbhantarā kammantā uṇṇāti vā kappāsāti vā, tattha dakkhā bhavissāma analasā, tatrupāyāya vīmaṃsāya samannāgatā, alaṃ kātuṃ alaṃ saṃvidhātun’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will be skilled and tireless in doing domestic duties for our husband, such as knitting and sewing. We will have an understanding of how to go about things in order to complete and organize the work.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, kumāriyo, sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, kumāriyo, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, girls, you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so bhattu abbhantaro antojano dāsāti vā pessāti vā kammakarāti vā, tesaṃ katañca katato jānissāma akatañca akatato jānissāma, gilānakānañca balābalaṃ jānissāma, khādanīyaṃ bhojanīyañcassa paccaṃsena saṃvibhajissāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will know what work our husband’s domestic bondservants, workers, and staff have completed, and what they’ve left incomplete. We will know who is sick, and who is fit or unwell. We will distribute to each a fair portion of various foods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, kumāriyo, sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, kumāriyo, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, girls, you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yaṃ bhattā āharissati dhanaṃ vā dhaññaṃ vā rajataṃ vā jātarūpaṃ vā, taṃ ārakkhena guttiyā sampādessāma, tattha ca bhavissāma adhuttī athenī asoṇḍī avināsikāyo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will ensure that any income our husbands earn is guarded and protected, whether money, grain, silver, or gold. We will not overspend, steal, waste, or lose it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, kumāriyo, sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, kumāriyo, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manāpakāyikānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have these five qualities, females—when their body breaks up, after death—are reborn in company with the Gods of the Lovable Host. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo naṃ bharati sabbadā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’d never look down on her husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niccaṃ ātāpi ussuko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s always keen to work hard, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbakāmaharaṃ posaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">always looking after her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhattāraṃ nātimaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and bringing whatever she wants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāpi sotthi bhattāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a good woman never scolds her husband </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">issācārena rosaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with jealous words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhattu ca garuno sabbe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being astute, she reveres </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭipūjeti paṇḍitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those respected by her husband. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṭṭhāhikā analasā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She gets up early, works tirelessly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgahitaparijjanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and manages the domestic help. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhattu manāpaṃ carati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s loveable to her husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambhataṃ anurakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and preserves his wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evaṃ vattatī nārī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lady who fulfills these duties </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhattuchandavasānugā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">according to her husband’s desire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manāpā nāma te devā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reborn among the gods </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha sā upapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">called ‘Loveable’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
