<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.169-169. Khippanisantisutta  - 169. Quick-witted </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.169. 169. Khippanisantisutta  - 169. Quick-witted </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Āghātavagga  - 17. Resentment </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu khippanisanti ca hoti, kusalesu dhammesu suggahitaggāhī ca, bahuñca gaṇhāti, gahitañcassa nappamussatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, how are we to define a mendicant who is quick-witted when it comes to skillful principles, who learns well, learns much, and does not forget what they’ve learned?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āyasmā kho ānando bahussuto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, Venerable Ānanda, you’re very learned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭibhātu āyasmantaṃyeva ānandan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t you clarify this yourself?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tenahāvuso sāriputta, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Reverend Sāriputta, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmato ānandassa paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” Sāriputta replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ānando etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Ānanda said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu atthakusalo ca hoti, dhammakusalo ca, byañjanakusalo ca, niruttikusalo ca, pubbāparakusalo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a mendicant is skilled in the meaning, skilled in the teaching, skilled in terminology, skilled in phrasing, and skilled in sequence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu khippanisanti ca hoti kusalesu dhammesu, suggahitaggāhī ca, bahuñca gaṇhāti, gahitañcassa nappamussatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how to define a mendicant who is quick-witted when it comes to skillful principles, who learns well, learns much, and does not forget what they’ve learned.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, āvuso, abbhutaṃ, āvuso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva subhāsitañcidaṃ āyasmatā ānandena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How well this was said by Venerable Ānanda! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi ca mayaṃ pañcahi dhammehi samannāgataṃ āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ dhārema: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And we will remember Venerable Ānanda as someone who has these five qualities: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘āyasmā ānando atthakusalo dhammakusalo byañjanakusalo niruttikusalo pubbāparakusalo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverend Ānanda is skilled in the meaning, skilled in the teaching, skilled in terminology, skilled in phrasing, and skilled in sequence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
