<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.272-272. Bhattuddesakasutta  - 272. A Meal Assigner </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.272. 272. Bhattuddesakasutta  - 272. A Meal Assigner </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">27. Sammutipeyyāla  - 27. Abbreviated Texts on Appointments </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako na sammannitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a person with five qualities should not be appointed as meal assigner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandāgatiṃ gacchati, dosāgatiṃ gacchati, mohāgatiṃ gacchati, bhayāgatiṃ gacchati, uddiṭṭhānuddiṭṭhaṃ na jānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they don’t know if a meal has been assigned or not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako na sammannitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person with these five qualities should not be appointed as meal assigner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako sammannitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person with five qualities should be appointed as meal assigner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na chandāgatiṃ gacchati, na dosāgatiṃ gacchati, na mohāgatiṃ gacchati, na bhayāgatiṃ gacchati, uddiṭṭhānuddiṭṭhaṃ jānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they know if a meal has been assigned or not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako sammannitabboti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person with these five qualities should be appointed as meal assigner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako sammato na pesetabbo … pe … sammato pesetabbo … bālo veditabbo … paṇḍito veditabbo … khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati … akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati … yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye … yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ sagge. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person with five qualities who has been appointed as meal assigner should not be called upon … should be called upon … should be known as a fool … should be known as astute … they keep themselves broken and damaged … they keep themselves unbroken and undamaged … is cast down to hell … is raised up to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na chandāgatiṃ gacchati, na dosāgatiṃ gacchati, na mohāgatiṃ gacchati, na bhayāgatiṃ gacchati, uddiṭṭhānuddiṭṭhaṃ jānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they know if a meal has been assigned or not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhattuddesako yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ sagge”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A meal assigner with these five qualities is raised up to heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
