<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.081-81. Rajanīyasutta  - 81. Desirable </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.081. 81. Rajanīyasutta  - 81. Desirable </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Theravagga  - 9. Senior Mendicants </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato thero bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and unlovable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rajanīye rajjati, dussanīye dussati, mohanīye muyhati, kuppanīye kuppati, madanīye majjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They desire the desirable, they hate the hateful, they’re deluded by the delusory, they’re annoyed by the annoying, and they’re intoxicated by the intoxicating. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato thero bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A senior mendicant with these five qualities is unlikable and unlovable by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato thero bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions, respected and admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rajanīye na rajjati, dussanīye na dussati, mohanīye na muyhati, kuppanīye na kuppati, madanīye na majjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t desire the desirable, they don’t hate the hateful, they’re not deluded by the delusory, they’re not annoyed by the annoying, and they’re not intoxicated by the intoxicating. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato thero bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions, respected and admired.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
