<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.218-218. Dutiyaapāsādikasutta  - 218. Uninspiring Conduct (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.218. 218. Dutiyaapāsādikasutta  - 218. Uninspiring Conduct (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">22. Akkosakavagga  - 22. Abuse </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā apāsādike. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of uninspiring conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appasannā nappasīdanti, pasannānañca ekaccānaṃ aññathattaṃ hoti, satthusāsanaṃ akataṃ hoti, pacchimā janatā diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati, cittamassa nappasīdati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You don’t inspire confidence in those without it. You cause some with confidence to change their minds. You don’t follow the Teacher’s instructions. Those who come after you follow your example. And your mind doesn’t become clear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ādīnavā apāsādike. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five drawbacks of uninspiring conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, ānisaṃsā pāsādike. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five benefits of inspiring conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appasannā pasīdanti, pasannānañca bhiyyobhāvo hoti, satthusāsanaṃ kataṃ hoti, pacchimā janatā diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati, cittamassa pasīdati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You inspire confidence in those without it. You increase confidence in those who have it. You follow the Teacher’s instructions. Those who come after you follow your example. And your mind becomes clear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā pāsādike”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five benefits of inspiring conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
