<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.190-190. Pattapiṇḍikasutta  - 190. Those Who Eat Only From the Almsbowl </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.190. 190. Pattapiṇḍikasutta  - 190. Those Who Eat Only From the Almsbowl </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Araññavagga  - 19. Wilderness Dwellers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, pattapiṇḍikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five kinds of people who eat only from the almsbowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mandattā momūhattā pattapiṇḍiko hoti, pāpiccho icchāpakato pattapiṇḍiko hoti, ummādā cittakkhepā pattapiṇḍiko hoti, ‘vaṇṇitaṃ buddhehi buddhasāvakehī’ti pattapiṇḍiko hoti, appicchataṃyeva nissāya santuṭṭhiṃyeva nissāya sallekhaṃyeva nissāya pavivekaṃyeva nissāya idamatthitaṃyeva nissāya pattapiṇḍiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person may eat only from the almsbowl because of stupidity and folly. Or because of wicked desires, being naturally full of desires. Or because of madness and mental disorder. Or because it is praised by the Buddhas and their disciples. Or for the sake of having few wishes, for the sake of contentment, self-effacement, seclusion, and simplicity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca pattapiṇḍikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five kinds of people who eat only from the almsbowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ pattapiṇḍikānaṃ yvāyaṃ pattapiṇḍiko appicchataṃyeva nissāya santuṭṭhiṃyeva nissāya sallekhaṃyeva nissāya pavivekaṃyeva nissāya idamatthitaṃyeva nissāya pattapiṇḍiko hoti, ayaṃ imesaṃ pañcannaṃ pattapiṇḍikānaṃ aggo ca seṭṭho ca mokkho ca uttamo ca pavaro ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the person who eats only from the almsbowl for the sake of having few wishes is the foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gavā khīraṃ, khīramhā dadhi, dadhimhā navanītaṃ, navanītamhā sappi, sappimhā sappimaṇḍo, sappimaṇḍo tattha aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter, from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream of ghee is said to be the best of these. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, imesaṃ pañcannaṃ pattapiṇḍikānaṃ yvāyaṃ pattapiṇḍiko appicchataṃyeva nissāya santuṭṭhiṃyeva nissāya sallekhaṃyeva nissāya pavivekaṃyeva nissāya idamatthitaṃyeva nissāya pattapiṇḍiko hoti, ayaṃ imesaṃ pañcannaṃ pattapiṇḍikānaṃ aggo ca seṭṭho ca mokkho ca uttamo ca pavaro cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the person who eats only from the almsbowl for the sake of having few wishes is the foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Araññavaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Araññaṃ cīvaraṃ rukkha, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susānaṃ abbhokāsikaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nesajjaṃ santhataṃ ekāsanikaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khalupacchāpiṇḍikena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
