<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.212-212. Bhaṇḍanakārakasutta  - 212. Starting Arguments </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.212. 212. Bhaṇḍanakārakasutta  - 212. Starting Arguments </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">22. Akkosakavagga  - 22. Abuse </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu bhaṇḍanakārako kalahakārako vivādakārako bhassakārako saṃghe adhikaraṇakārako, tassa pañca ādīnavā pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant who starts arguments, quarrels, fights, debates, and disciplinary issues in the Saṅgha can expect five drawbacks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhigataṃ nādhigacchati, adhigatā parihāyati, pāpako kittisaddo abbhuggacchati, sammūḷho kālaṃ karoti, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t achieve the unachieved. What they have achieved falls away. They get a bad reputation. They feel lost when they die. And when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu bhaṇḍanakārako kalahakārako vivādakārako bhassakārako saṃghe adhikaraṇakārako, tassa ime pañca ādīnavā pāṭikaṅkhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who starts arguments, quarrels, fights, debates, and disciplinary issues in the Saṅgha can expect these five drawbacks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
