<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.128-128. Samaṇasukhasutta  - 128. An Ascetic’s Happiness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.128. 128. Samaṇasukhasutta  - 128. An Ascetic’s Happiness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gilānavagga  - 13. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, samaṇadukkhāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five kinds of suffering for an ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu asantuṭṭho hoti itarītarena cīvarena, asantuṭṭho hoti itarītarena piṇḍapātena, asantuṭṭho hoti itarītarena senāsanena, asantuṭṭho hoti itarītarena gilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena, anabhirato ca brahmacariyaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is not content with any kind of robe, alms-food, lodging, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they live the spiritual life dissatisfied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca samaṇadukkhāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are five kinds of suffering for an ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, samaṇasukhāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five kinds of happiness for an ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena cīvarena, santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena piṇḍapātena, santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena senāsanena, santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena gilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena, abhirato ca brahmacariyaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is content with any kind of robe, alms-food, lodging, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they live the spiritual life satisfied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca samaṇasukhānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are five kinds of happiness for an ascetic.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
