<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.103-103. Mahācorasutta  - 103. A Master Thief </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.103. 103. Mahācorasutta  - 103. A Master Thief </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Phāsuvihāravagga  - 11. Living Comfortably </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato mahācoro sandhimpi chindati, nillopampi harati, ekāgārikampi karoti, paripanthepi tiṭṭhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a master thief with five factors breaks into houses, plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway robbery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mahācoro visamanissito ca hoti, gahananissito ca, balavanissito ca, bhogacāgī ca, ekacārī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A master thief relies on rough ground, on thick cover, and on powerful individuals; they pay bribes, and they act alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mahācoro visamanissito hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a master thief rely on rough ground? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mahācoro nadīviduggaṃ vā nissito hoti pabbatavisamaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a master thief relies on inaccessible riverlands or rugged mountains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mahācoro visamanissito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a master thief relies on rough ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mahācoro gahananissito hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a master thief rely on thick cover? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mahācoro tiṇagahanaṃ vā nissito hoti rukkhagahanaṃ vā rodhaṃ vā mahāvanasaṇḍaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a master thief relies on thick grass, thick trees, a ridge, or a large dense wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mahācoro gahananissito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a master thief relies on thick cover. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mahācoro balavanissito hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a master thief rely on powerful individuals? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mahācoro rājānaṃ vā rājamahāmattānaṃ vā nissito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a master thief relies on rulers or their ministers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace maṃ koci kiñci vakkhati, ime me rājāno vā rājamahāmattā vā pariyodhāya atthaṃ bhaṇissantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their ministers will speak in my defense in the case.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace naṃ koci kiñci āha, tyassa rājāno vā rājamahāmattā vā pariyodhāya atthaṃ bhaṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s exactly what happens. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mahācoro balavanissito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a master thief relies on powerful individuals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mahācoro bhogacāgī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a master thief pay bribes? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mahācoro aḍḍho hoti mahaddhano mahābhogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a master thief is rich, affluent, and wealthy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace maṃ koci kiñci vakkhati, ito bhogena paṭisantharissāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If anyone accuses me of anything, I’ll settle it with a bribe.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace naṃ koci kiñci āha, tato bhogena paṭisantharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s exactly what happens. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mahācoro bhogacāgī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a master thief pays bribes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mahācoro ekacārī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a master thief act alone? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mahācoro ekakova gahaṇāni kattā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a master thief carries out robbery all alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mā me guyhamantā bahiddhā sambhedaṃ agamaṃsū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that their secret plans are not leaked to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mahācoro ekacārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a master thief acts alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahaṅgehi samannāgato mahācoro sandhimpi chindati nillopampi harati ekāgārikampi karoti paripanthepi tiṭṭhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A master thief with these five factors breaks into houses, plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway robbery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato pāpabhikkhu khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when a bad mendicant has five factors, they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu visamanissito ca hoti, gahananissito ca, balavanissito ca, bhogacāgī ca, ekacārī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A bad mendicant relies on rough ground, on thick cover, and on powerful individuals; they pay bribes, and they act alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu visamanissito hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a bad mendicant rely on rough ground? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu visamena kāyakammena samannāgato hoti, visamena vacīkammena samannāgato hoti, visamena manokammena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a bad mendicant has unethical conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu visamanissito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a bad mendicant relies on rough ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu gahananissito hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a bad mendicant rely on thick cover? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu micchādiṭṭhiko hoti antaggāhikāya diṭṭhiyā samannāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a bad mendicant has wrong view, he’s attached to an extremist view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu gahananissito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a bad mendicant relies on thick cover. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu balavanissito hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a bad mendicant rely on powerful individuals? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu rājānaṃ vā rājamahāmattānaṃ vā nissito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a bad mendicant relies on rulers or their ministers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace maṃ koci kiñci vakkhati, ime me rājāno vā rājamahāmattā vā pariyodhāya atthaṃ bhaṇissantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their ministers will speak in my defense in the case.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace naṃ koci kiñci āha, tyassa rājāno vā rājamahāmattā vā pariyodhāya atthaṃ bhaṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s exactly what happens. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu balavanissito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a bad mendicant relies on powerful individuals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu bhogacāgī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a bad mendicant pay bribes? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu lābhī hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a bad mendicant receives robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace maṃ koci kiñci vakkhati, ito lābhena paṭisantharissāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If anyone accuses me of anything, I’ll settle it with a bribe.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace naṃ koci kiñci āha, tato lābhena paṭisantharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s exactly what happens. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu bhogacāgī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a bad mendicant pays bribes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu ekacārī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a bad mendicant act alone? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu ekakova paccantimesu janapadesu nivāsaṃ kappeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a bad mendicant dwells alone in the borderlands. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha kulāni upasaṅkamanto lābhaṃ labhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They visit families there to get material possessions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pāpabhikkhu ekacārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a bad mendicant acts alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato pāpabhikkhu khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a bad mendicant has these five factors, they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
