<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.105-105. Phāsuvihārasutta  - 105. Living Comfortably </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.105. 105. Phāsuvihārasutta  - 105. Living Comfortably </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Phāsuvihāravagga  - 11. Living Comfortably </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, phāsuvihārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five ways of living comfortably. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno mettaṃ kāyakammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi ceva raho ca, mettaṃ vacīkammaṃ … mettaṃ manokammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni tāni sīlāni akhaṇḍāni acchiddāni asabalāni akammāsāni bhujissāni viññuppasatthāni aparāmaṭṭhāni samādhisaṃvattanikāni, tathārūpehi sīlehi sīlasāmaññagato viharati sabrahmacārīhi āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live according to the precepts shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those precepts are unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ diṭṭhi ariyā niyyānikā niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāya, tathārūpāya diṭṭhiyā diṭṭhisāmaññagato viharati sabrahmacārīhi āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live according to the view shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and brings one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca phāsuvihārā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five ways of living comfortably.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
