<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc71_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">71. Sahadhammikasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">71. The training rule on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā kosambiyaṁ viharati ghositārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā channo anācāraṁ ācarati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Channa was misbehaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks told him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māvuso channa, evarūpaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t do that, Channa, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ kappatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s not allowable,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he would reply, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na tāvāhaṁ, āvuso, etasmiṁ sikkhāpade sikkhissāmi yāva na aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ byattaṁ vinayadharaṁ paripucchāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I won’t practice this training rule until I’ve questioned a monk who is an expert on the Monastic Law.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā channo bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno evaṁ vakkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Channa say this when legitimately corrected by the monks?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na tāvāhaṁ, āvuso, etasmiṁ sikkhāpade sikkhissāmi yāva na aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ byattaṁ vinayadharaṁ paripucchāmī’”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, channa, bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno evaṁ vadesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Channa, that you said this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na tāvāhaṁ, āvuso, etasmiṁ sikkhāpade sikkhissāmi yāva na aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ byattaṁ vinayadharaṁ paripucchāmī’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno evaṁ vakkhasi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you say this when legitimately corrected by the monks? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na tāvāhaṁ, āvuso, etasmiṁ sikkhāpade sikkhissāmi yāva na aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ byattaṁ vinayadharaṁ paripucchāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno evaṁ vadeyya—‘na tāvāhaṁ, āvuso, etasmiṁ sikkhāpade sikkhissāmi yāva na aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ byattaṁ vinayadharaṁ paripucchāmī’ti, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk, when legitimately corrected by the monks, says, “I won’t practice this training rule until I’ve questioned a monk who is an expert on the Monastic Law,” he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhamānena, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā aññātabbaṁ paripucchitabbaṁ paripañhitabbaṁ. Ayaṁ tattha sāmīcī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk who is training should understand, should question, should enquire. This is the proper procedure.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">By the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññehi bhikkhūhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">by other monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Legitimately: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ bhagavatā paññattaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ etaṁ sahadhammikaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the training rules laid down by the Buddha—this is called “legitimately”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena vuccamāno evaṁ vadeti— “na tāvāhaṁ, āvuso, etasmiṁ sikkhāpade sikkhissāmi yāva na aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ byattaṁ vinayadharaṁ paripucchāmī”ti. Paṇḍitaṁ byattaṁ medhāviṁ bahussutaṁ dhammakathikaṁ paripucchāmīti bhaṇati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When corrected in regard to this, he says, “I won’t practice this training rule until I’ve questioned a monk who’s an expert on the Monastic Law.” If he says, “I’ll question one who’s wise,” “I’ll question one who’s competent,” “I’ll question one who’s intelligent,” “I’ll question one who’s learned,” “I’ll question an expounder of the Teaching,” he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī evaṁ vadeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the one who corrects him is fully ordained, and he perceives him as such, and he says such a thing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko evaṁ vadeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the one who corrects him is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he says such a thing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī evaṁ vadeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the one who corrects him is fully ordained, but he does not perceive him as such, and he says such a thing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaññattena vuccamāno—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is corrected about something that has not been laid down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ na sallekhāya na dhutatthāya na pāsādikatāya na apacayāya na vīriyārambhāya saṁvattatī”ti evaṁ vadeti, “na tāvāhaṁ, āvuso, etasmiṁ sikkhāpade sikkhissāmi yāva na aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ byattaṁ vinayadharaṁ paṇḍitaṁ medhāviṁ bahussutaṁ dhammakathikaṁ paripucchāmī”ti bhaṇati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This isn’t conducive to the erasing of defilements,” “This isn’t conducive to ascetic practices,” “This isn’t conducive to being inspiring,” “This isn’t conducive to a reduction in things,” “This isn’t conducive to being energetic,” and he says, “I won’t practice this training rule until I’ve questioned a monk who’s competent,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s an expert on the Monastic Law,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s wise,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s intelligent,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s learned,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s an expounder of the Teaching,” he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannena paññattena vā apaññattena vā vuccamāno—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is corrected by one who is not fully ordained about something that has or has not been laid down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ na sallekhāya na dhutatthāya na pāsādikatāya na apacayāya na vīriyārambhāya saṁvattatī”ti evaṁ vadeti, “na tāvāhaṁ, āvuso, etasmiṁ sikkhāpade sikkhissāmi yāva na aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ byattaṁ vinayadharaṁ paṇḍitaṁ medhāviṁ bahussutaṁ dhammakathikaṁ paripucchāmī”ti bhaṇati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This isn’t conducive to the erasing of defilements,” “This isn’t conducive to ascetic practices,” “This isn’t conducive to being inspiring,” “This isn’t conducive to a reduction in things,” “This isn’t conducive to being energetic,” and he says, “I won’t practice this training rule until I’ve questioned a monk who’s competent,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s an expert on the Monastic Law,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s wise,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s intelligent,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s learned,” “… until I’ve questioned a monk who’s an expounder of the Teaching,” he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the one who corrects him is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the one who corrects him is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the one who corrects him is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhamānenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is training: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhitukāmena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who wants to train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jānitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">should find out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripucchitabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ, bhante, kathaṁ; imassa vā kvattho”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">should ask, “Venerable, how is this? What’s the meaning of this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripañhitabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should enquire: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cintetabbaṁ tulayitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">should reflect, should weigh up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ tattha sāmīcīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the proper procedure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṁ tattha anudhammatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the right method. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“jānissāmi sikkhissāmī”ti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he says, “I’ll find out and I’ll train;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on legitimately, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
