<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np8_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">8. Upakkhaṭasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">8. The training rule on what is set aside </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro puriso pajāpatiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain man said to his wife, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m giving a robe to Venerable Upananda.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho aññataro piṇḍacāriko bhikkhu tassa purisassa imaṁ vācaṁ bhāsamānassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An alms-collecting monk heard that man making that statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu yenāyasmā upanando sakyaputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then went to Upananda the Sakyan and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahāpuññosi tvaṁ, āvuso upananda.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Upananda, you have much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amukasmiṁ okāse aññataro puriso pajāpatiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In such-and-such a place I heard a man tell his wife </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that he’s giving you a robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthāvuso, maṁ so upaṭṭhāko”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“He’s my supporter.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto yena so puriso tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ purisaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Upananda then went to that man and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira maṁ tvaṁ, āvuso, cīvarena acchādetukāmosī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true that you want to give me a robe?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Api meyya, evaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s just what I was thinking.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace kho maṁ tvaṁ, āvuso, cīvarena acchādetukāmosi, evarūpena cīvarena acchādehi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If that’s the case, give me such-and-such a robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kyāhaṁ tena acchannopi karissāmi yāhaṁ na paribhuñjissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For what’s the point of giving a robe that I won’t use?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That man complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahicchā ime samaṇā sakyaputtiyā asantuṭṭhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These Sakyan monastics have great desires. They’re not content. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nayime sukarā cīvarena acchādetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s no easy matter to give them a robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma ayyo upanando mayā pubbe appavārito maṁ upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could Venerable Upananda come to me and say what kind of robe he wants without first being invited by me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa purisassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto pubbe appavārito gahapatikaṁ upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Upananda go to a householder and say what kind of robe he wants without first being invited?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Upananda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, pubbe appavārito gahapatikaṁ upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ñātako te, upananda, aññātako”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is he a relative of yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātako, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātako, moghapurisa, aññātakassa na jānāti patirūpaṁ vā appatirūpaṁ vā santaṁ vā asantaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, people who are unrelated don’t know what’s appropriate and inappropriate, what’s good and bad, in dealing with each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, pubbe appavārito aññātakaṁ gahapatikaṁ upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And still you did this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhuṁ paneva uddissa aññātakassa gahapatissa vā gahapatāniyā vā cīvaracetāpannaṁ upakkhaṭaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a male or female householder has set aside a robe fund for an unrelated monk, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iminā cīvaracetāpannena cīvaraṁ cetāpetvā itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī’ti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“With this robe fund I will buy a robe and give it to monk so-and-so;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra ce so bhikkhu pubbe appavārito upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and if that monk, without first being invited, goes to them and specifies the kind of robe he wants, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhu vata maṁ āyasmā iminā cīvaracetāpannena evarūpaṁ vā evarūpaṁ vā cīvaraṁ cetāpetvā acchādehī’ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It would be good if you would use this robe fund to buy such-and-such a robe and then give it to me,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇakamyataṁ upādāya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he does so because he wants something nice, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuṁ paneva uddissāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">For a monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhussatthāya, bhikkhuṁ ārammaṇaṁ karitvā, bhikkhuṁ acchādetukāmo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the benefit of a monk; making a monk the object of consideration, one wants to give to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unrelated: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātito vā pitito vā yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā asambaddho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who is not a descendant of one’s male ancestors going back seven generations, either on the mother’s side or on the father’s side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A male householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any man who lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapatānī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A female householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any woman who lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaracetāpannaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A robe fund: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hiraññaṁ vā suvaṇṇaṁ vā muttā vā maṇi vā pavāḷo vā phaliko vā paṭako vā suttaṁ vā kappāso vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">money, gold, a pearl, a gem, a coral, a crystal, cloth, thread, or cotton wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā cīvaracetāpannenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With this robe fund: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccupaṭṭhitena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">with that which is at one’s disposal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will buy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parivattetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having swapped. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchādessāmīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will give: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dassāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will donate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra ce so bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ bhikkhuṁ uddissa cīvaracetāpannaṁ upakkhaṭaṁ hoti so bhikkhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk the robe fund has been set aside for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe appavāritoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without first being invited: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbe avutto hoti— “kīdisena te, bhante, cīvarena attho, kīdisaṁ te cīvaraṁ cetāpemī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">he or she has not said beforehand: “Venerable, what kind of robe do you need? What kind of robe can I buy for you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasaṅkamitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Goes to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gharaṁ gantvā yattha katthaci upasaṅkamitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having gone to their house or having gone wherever. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Specifies the kind of robe he wants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyataṁ vā hotu vitthataṁ vā appitaṁ vā saṇhaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">please make it long or wide or closely woven or soft. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā cīvaracetāpannenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">This robe fund: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccupaṭṭhitena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that which is at one’s disposal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpaṁ vā evarūpaṁ vāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such-and-such: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyataṁ vā vitthataṁ vā appitaṁ vā saṇhaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">long or wide or closely woven or soft. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To buy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parivattetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having swapped. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchādehīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Give: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dajjehi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">donate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalyāṇakamyataṁ upādāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because he wants something nice: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sādhatthiko mahagghatthiko.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wanting something nice, wanting something expensive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vacanena āyataṁ vā vitthataṁ vā appitaṁ vā saṇhaṁ vā cetāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that lay person buys a robe that is long, wide, closely woven, or soft because of the monk’s statement, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets the robe, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ pubbe appavārito aññātakaṁ gahapatikaṁ upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpannaṁ nissaggiyaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe, which I received after going to an unrelated householder and saying what kind of robe I wanted without first being invited, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake aññātakasaññī pubbe appavārito gahapatikaṁ upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is unrelated and the monk perceives them as such, and, without first being invited, he goes to them and specifies the kind of robe he wants, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake vematiko pubbe appavārito gahapatikaṁ upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is unrelated, but the monk is unsure of it, and, without first being invited, he goes to them and specifies the kind of robe he wants, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake ñātakasaññī pubbe appavārito gahapatikaṁ upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is unrelated, but the monk perceives them as related, and, without first being invited, he goes to them and specifies the kind of robe he wants, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake aññātakasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is related, but the monk perceives them as unrelated, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is related, but the monk is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake ñātakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is related and the monk perceives them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of another; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of his own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahagghaṁ cetāpetukāmassa appagghaṁ cetāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the householder wishes to buy something expensive, but the monk has them buy something inexpensive; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upakkhaṭasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on what is set aside, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
