<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc55_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on drinking alcohol </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">55. Bhiṁsāpanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">55. The training rule on scaring </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sattarasavaggiye bhikkhū bhiṁsāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six were scaring the monks from the group of seventeen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhiṁsāpīyamānā rodanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They cried. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other monks asked them why, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tumhe, āvuso, rodathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ime, āvuso, chabbaggiyā bhikkhū amhe bhiṁsāpentī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhuṁ bhiṁsāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six scare other monks?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṁ bhiṁsāpethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhuṁ bhiṁsāpessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuṁ bhiṁsāpeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk scares a monk, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">…The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhiṁsāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Scares: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampanno upasampannaṁ bhiṁsāpetukāmo rūpaṁ vā saddaṁ vā gandhaṁ vā rasaṁ vā phoṭṭhabbaṁ vā upasaṁharati. Bhāyeyya vā so na vā bhāyeyya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if one who is fully ordained, wishing to scare another who is fully ordained, arranges a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste, or a physical contact, then whether the other monk is scared or not, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Corakantāraṁ vā vāḷakantāraṁ vā pisācakantāraṁ vā ācikkhati. Bhāyeyya vā so na vā bhāyeyya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells him about a wilderness inhabited by criminals, predatory animals, or demons, then whether the other monk is scared or not, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī bhiṁsāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and he perceives him as such, and he scares him, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko bhiṁsāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he scares him, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī bhiṁsāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but he does not perceive him as such, and he scares him, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ bhiṁsāpetukāmo rūpaṁ vā saddaṁ vā gandhaṁ vā rasaṁ vā phoṭṭhabbaṁ vā upasaṁharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, wishing to scare someone who is not fully ordained, he arranges a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste, or a physical contact, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāyeyya vā so na vā bhāyeyya, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then whether the other person is scared or not, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Corakantāraṁ vā vāḷakantāraṁ vā pisācakantāraṁ vā ācikkhati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells him about a wilderness inhabited by criminals, predatory animals, or demons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāyeyya vā so na vā bhāyeyya, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then whether the other person is scared or not, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na bhiṁsāpetukāmo rūpaṁ vā saddaṁ vā gandhaṁ vā rasaṁ vā phoṭṭhabbaṁ vā upasaṁharati, corakantāraṁ vā vāḷakantāraṁ vā pisācakantāraṁ vā ācikkhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he arranges a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste, or a physical contact, or he tells about a wilderness inhabited by criminals, predatory animals, or demons, but not because he wishes to scare anyone; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhiṁsāpanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on scaring, the fifth, is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
