<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np24_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">24. Vassikasāṭikasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">24. The training rule on rainy-season robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ vassikasāṭikā anuññātā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the Buddha had allowed the rainy-season robe for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū—“bhagavatā vassikasāṭikā anuññātā”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that this was the case, the monks from the group of six </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭikacceva vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">went looking for cloth for their rainy-season robes in advance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭikacceva katvā nivāsenti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And after sewing them in advance, they wore them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jiṇṇāya vassikasāṭikāya naggā kāyaṁ ovassāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, because their rainy-season robes were worn, they bathed naked in the rain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū paṭikacceva vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesissanti, paṭikacceva katvā nivāsessanti, jiṇṇāya vassikasāṭikāya naggā kāyaṁ ovassāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six go looking for cloth for their rainy-season robes in advance, sew them in advance, and then wear them, and then, because their rainy-season robes are worn, bathe naked in the rain?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking the monks from the group of six in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, paṭikacceva vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesatha?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭikacceva katvā nivāsetha?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jiṇṇāya vassikasāṭikāya naggā kāyaṁ ovassāpethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe moghapurisā, paṭikacceva vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesissatha, paṭikacceva katvā nivāsessatha, jiṇṇāya vassikasāṭikāya naggā kāyaṁ ovassāpessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Māso seso gimhānan’ti bhikkhunā vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesitabbaṁ; ‘addhamāso seso gimhānan’ti katvā nivāsetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When there is a month left of the hot season, a monk may go looking for cloth for his rainy-season robe. When there is a half-month left, he may sew it and then wear it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Orena ce māso seso gimhānan’ti vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyeseyya, ‘orenaddhamāso seso gimhānan’ti katvā nivāseyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he goes looking for cloth for his rainy-season robe when there is more than a month left of the hot season, or if he sews it and then wears it when there is more than a half-month left, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Māso seso gimhānan”ti bhikkhunā vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesitabbanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is a month left of the hot season, a monk may go looking for cloth for his rainy-season robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye manussā pubbepi vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ denti te upasaṅkamitvā evamassu vacanīyā— “kālo vassikasāṭikāya, samayo vassikasāṭikāya, aññepi manussā vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ dentī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">after going to those people who previously, too, have given cloth for the rainy-season robes, he should say, “It’s time for the rainy-season robe,” “It’s the occasion for the rainy-season robe,” “Other people, too, are giving cloth for the rainy-season robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na vattabbā— “detha me vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ, āharatha me vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ, parivattetha me vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ, cetāpetha me vassikasāṭikacīvaran”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should not say, “Give me cloth for the rainy-season robe,” “Bring me cloth for the rainy-season robe,” “Swap me cloth for the rainy-season robe,” “Buy me cloth for the rainy-season robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Addhamāso seso gimhānan”ti katvā nivāsetabbanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is a half-month left, he may sew it and then wear it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addhamāse sese gimhāne katvā nivāsetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">after sewing it during the last half-month of the hot season, he may wear it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Orena ce māso seso gimhānan”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is more than a month left of the hot season: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atirekamāse sese gimhāne vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes looking for cloth for the rainy-season robe when there is more than a month left of the hot season, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Orenaddhamāso seso gimhānan”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is more than a half-month left: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atirekaddhamāse sese gimhāne katvā nivāseti, nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he wears it after sewing it when there is more than a half-month left of the hot season, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The rainy-season robe should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ atirekamāse sese gimhāne pariyiṭṭhaṁ atirekaddhamāse sese gimhāne katvā paridahitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this cloth for the rainy-season robe, which I went looking for when there was more than a month left of the hot season or which I wore after sewing it when there was more than a half-month left of the hot season, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this cloth for the rainy-season robe back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekamāse sese gimhāne atirekasaññī vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is more than a month left of the hot season, and he perceives it as more, and he goes looking for cloth for a rainy-season robe, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekamāse sese gimhāne vematiko vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is more than a month left of the hot season, but he is unsure of it, and he goes looking for cloth for a rainy-season robe, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekamāse sese gimhāne ūnakasaññī vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is more than a month left of the hot season, but he perceives it as less, and he goes looking for cloth for a rainy-season robe, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekaddhamāse sese gimhāne atirekasaññī katvā nivāseti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is more than a half-month left of the hot season, and he perceives it as more, and he wears the rainy-season robe after sewing it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekaddhamāse sese gimhāne vematiko katvā nivāseti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is more than a half-month left of the hot season, but he is unsure of it, and he wears the rainy-season robe after sewing it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekaddhamāse sese gimhāne ūnakasaññī katvā nivāseti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is more than a half-month left of the hot season, but he perceives it as less, and he wears the rainy-season robe after sewing it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satiyā vassikasāṭikāya naggo kāyaṁ ovassāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has a rainy-season robe, but he bathes naked in the rain, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakamāse sese gimhāne atirekasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is less than a month left of the hot season, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakamāse sese gimhāne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is less than a month left of the hot season, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakamāse sese gimhāne ūnakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is less than a month left of the hot season, and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakaddhamāse sese gimhāne atirekasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is less than a half-month left of the hot season, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakaddhamāse sese gimhāne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is less than a half-month left of the hot season, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakaddhamāse sese gimhāne ūnakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is less than a half-month left of the hot season, and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māso seso gimhānan”ti vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes looking for cloth for the rainy-season robe when there is a month left of the hot season; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“addhamāso seso gimhānan”ti katvā nivāseti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he wears the rainy-season robe after sewing it when there is a half-month left of the hot season; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ūnakamāso seso gimhānan”ti vassikasāṭikacīvaraṁ pariyesati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes looking for cloth for the rainy-season robe when there is less than a month left of the hot season; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ūnakaddhamāso seso gimhānan”ti katvā nivāseti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he wears the rainy-season robe after sewing it when there is less than a half-month left of the hot season; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyiṭṭhāya vassikasāṭikāya vassaṁ ukkaḍḍhiyyati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, after looking for a rainy-season robe, he postpones the rainy-season residence; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nivatthāya vassikasāṭikāya vassaṁ ukkaḍḍhiyyati, dhovitvā nikkhipitabbaṁ; samaye nivāsetabbaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, after wearing a rainy-season robe, he postpones the rainy-season residence (in which case he should wash it and store it and then use it at the right time); </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acchinnacīvarassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if his robe has been stolen; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">naṭṭhacīvarassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if his robe has been lost; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vassikasāṭikasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on rainy-season robes, the fourth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
