<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc63_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">63. Ukkoṭanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">63. The training rule on reopening </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū jānaṁ yathādhammaṁ nihatādhikaraṇaṁ punakammāya ukkoṭenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six were reopening a legal issue that they knew had been legitimately settled, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“akataṁ kammaṁ dukkaṭaṁ kammaṁ puna kātabbaṁ kammaṁ anihataṁ dunnihataṁ puna nihanitabban”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The legal procedure hasn’t been done;” “It’s been done badly;” “It should be done again;” “It’s not been settled;” “It’s been badly settled;” “It should be settled again.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū jānaṁ yathādhammaṁ nihatādhikaraṇaṁ punakammāya ukkoṭessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six reopen a legal issue that they know has been legitimately settled?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, jānaṁ yathādhammaṁ nihatādhikaraṇaṁ punakammāya ukkoṭethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you’re doing this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, jānaṁ yathādhammaṁ nihatādhikaraṇaṁ punakammāya ukkoṭessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ yathādhammaṁ nihatādhikaraṇaṁ punakammāya ukkoṭeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk reopens a legal issue that he knows has been legitimately settled, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti, aññe vā tassa ārocenti, so vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the Sangha has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathādhammaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Legitimately: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena kataṁ, etaṁ yathādhammaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">done according to the Teaching, according to the Monastic Law, according to the Teacher’s instruction—this is called “legitimately”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhikaraṇaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri adhikaraṇāni— vivādādhikaraṇaṁ, anuvādādhikaraṇaṁ, āpattādhikaraṇaṁ, kiccādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of legal issues: legal issues arising from disputes, legal issues arising from accusations, legal issues arising from offenses, legal issues arising from business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punakammāya ukkoṭeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Reopens: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“akataṁ kammaṁ dukkaṭaṁ kammaṁ punakātabbaṁ kammaṁ anihataṁ dunnihataṁ puna nihanitabban”ti ukkoṭeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he reopens it, saying, “The legal procedure hasn’t been done;” “It’s been done badly;” “It should be done again;” “It’s not been settled;” “It’s been badly settled;” “It should be settled again,” he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī ukkoṭeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, and he reopens it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko ukkoṭeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, and he reopens it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī ukkoṭeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as illegitimate, and he reopens it, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as legitimate, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“adhammena vā vaggena vā na kammārahassa vā kammaṁ katan”ti jānanto ukkoṭeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he reopens it because he knows that the legal procedure was illegitimate, done by an incomplete assembly, or done against one who did not deserve it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkoṭanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on reopening, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
