<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk57_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surusuruvagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on slurping </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">57. Chattapāṇisikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">57. The training rule on holding a sunshade </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the Bhagga country at Susumāragira in the Bhesakaḷā Grove, the deer park. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū chattapāṇissa dhammaṁ desenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six gave teachings to people holding sunshades. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū chattapāṇissa dhammaṁ desessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six give teachings to people holding a sunshade?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, chattapāṇissa dhammaṁ desethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, chattapāṇissa dhammaṁ desessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na chattapāṇissa dhammaṁ desessāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘“I will not give a teaching to anyone holding a sunshade,” this is how you should train.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū chattapāṇissa gilānassa dhammaṁ desetuṁ kukkuccāyanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards, being afraid of wrongdoing, the monks did not give teachings to sick people holding a sunshade. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā chattapāṇissa gilānassa dhammaṁ na desessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics not give teachings to someone who’s sick holding a sunshade?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, chattapāṇissa gilānassa dhammaṁ desetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to give a teaching to someone who’s sick holding a sunshade. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na chattapāṇissa agilānassa dhammaṁ desessāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘“I will not give a teaching to anyone holding a sunshade who is not sick,” this is how you should train.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A sunshade: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tīṇi chattāni— setacchattaṁ, kilañjacchattaṁ, paṇṇacchattaṁ maṇḍalabaddhaṁ salākabaddhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are three kinds of sunshades: the white sunshade, the reed sunshade, the leaf sunshade. They are bound at the rim and bound at the ribs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhabhāsito sāvakabhāsito isibhāsito devatābhāsito atthūpasañhito dhammūpasañhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what has been spoken by the Buddha, what has been spoken by disciples, what has been spoken by sages, what has been spoken by gods, what is connected with what is beneficial, what is connected with the Teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Deseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Give: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padena deseti, pade pade āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he teaches by the line, then for every line he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkharāya deseti, akkharakkharāya āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he teaches by the syllable, then for every syllable he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na chattapāṇissa agilānassa dhammo desetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should not give a teaching to anyone holding a sunshade who is not sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca chattapāṇissa agilānassa dhammaṁ deseti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk, out of disrespect, gives a teaching to someone holding a sunshade who is not sick, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
