<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc4_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">4. Padasodhammasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">4. The training rule on memorizing the Teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū upāsake padaso dhammaṁ vācenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six were instructing lay followers to memorize the Teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakā bhikkhūsu agāravā appatissā asabhāgavuttikā viharanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those lay followers became disrespectful, undeferential, and rude toward the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū upāsake padaso dhammaṁ vācessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six instruct lay followers to memorize the Teaching?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakā bhikkhūsu agāravā appatissā asabhāgavuttikā viharantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, upāsake padaso dhammaṁ vācetha;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakā bhikkhūsu agāravā appatissā asabhāgavuttikā viharantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, upāsake padaso dhammaṁ vācessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakā bhikkhūsu agāravā appatissā asabhāgavuttikā viharanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya pasannānaṁ vā bhiyyobhāvāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu anupasampannaṁ padaso dhammaṁ vāceyya pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk instructs a person who is not fully ordained to memorize the Teaching, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who is not fully ordained: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuñca bhikkhuniñca ṭhapetvā avaseso anupasampanno nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone except a fully ordained monk or a fully ordained nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Padaso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">To memorize: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padaṁ, anupadaṁ, anvakkharaṁ, anubyañjanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a line, the next line, syllable by syllable, the next phrase. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Padaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A line: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato paṭṭhapetvā ekato osāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they start together and finish together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupadaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The next line: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭekkaṁ paṭṭhapetvā ekato osāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of them starts, but they finish together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anvakkharaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Syllable by syllable: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“rūpaṁ aniccan”ti vuccamāno, “run”ti opāteti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when ‘_Rūpaṁ aniccaṁ_’ is being said, he prompts him, saying, ‘_rū_’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anubyañjanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The next phrase: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“rūpaṁ aniccan”ti vuccamāno, “vedanā aniccā”ti saddaṁ nicchāreti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when ‘_Rūpaṁ aniccaṁ_,’ is being said, the other says, ‘_Vedanā aniccā_.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañca padaṁ, yañca anupadaṁ, yañca anvakkharaṁ, yañca anubyañjanaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And whatever line there is, whatever next line, whatever syllable by syllable, whatever next phrase—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbametaṁ padaso nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is all called “to memorize”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhabhāsito, sāvakabhāsito, isibhāsito, devatābhāsito, atthūpasañhito, dhammūpasañhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what has been spoken by the Buddha, what has been spoken by disciples, what has been spoken by sages, what has been spoken by gods, what is connected with what is beneficial, what is connected with the Teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāceyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Instructs: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padena vāceti, pade pade āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he instructs by the line, then for every line he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkharāya vāceti, akkharakkharāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he instructs by the syllable, then for every syllable he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī padaso dhammaṁ vāceti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is not fully ordained, and the monk does not perceive them as such, and he instructs them to memorize the Teaching, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko padaso dhammaṁ vāceti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is not fully ordained, but the monk is unsure of it, and he instructs them to memorize the Teaching, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī padaso dhammaṁ vāceti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is not fully ordained, but the monk perceives them as such, and he instructs them to memorize the Teaching, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is fully ordained, but the monk does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is fully ordained, but the monk is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is fully ordained, and the monk perceives them such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato uddisāpento,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they recite together; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato sajjhāyaṁ karonto,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they practice together; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena paguṇaṁ ganthaṁ bhaṇantaṁ opāteti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he prompts one who is speaking a mostly familiar text; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">osārentaṁ opāteti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he prompts one who is reciting; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Padasodhammasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on memorizing the Teaching, the fourth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
