<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc85_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on precious things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">85. Vikālagāmappavisanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">85. The training rule on entering an inhabited area at the wrong time </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū vikāle gāmaṁ pavisitvā sabhāyaṁ nisīditvā anekavihitaṁ tiracchānakathaṁ kathenti, seyyathidaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six entered the village at the wrong time, sat down in the public meeting hall, and talked about all sorts of pointless things: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājakathaṁ corakathaṁ mahāmattakathaṁ senākathaṁ bhayakathaṁ yuddhakathaṁ annakathaṁ pānakathaṁ vatthakathaṁ sayanakathaṁ mālākathaṁ gandhakathaṁ ñātikathaṁ yānakathaṁ gāmakathaṁ nigamakathaṁ nagarakathaṁ janapadakathaṁ itthikathaṁ sūrakathaṁ visikhākathaṁ kumbhaṭṭhānakathaṁ pubbapetakathaṁ nānattakathaṁ lokakkhāyikaṁ samuddakkhāyikaṁ itibhavābhavakathaṁ iti vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">about kings, gangsters, and officials; about armies, dangers, and battles; about food, drink, clothes, and beds; about garlands and perfumes; about relatives, vehicles, villages, towns, and countries; about women and heroes; gossip; about the departed; about various trivialities; about the world and the sea; about the various kinds of existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā vikāle gāmaṁ pavisitvā sabhāyaṁ nisīditvā anekavihitaṁ tiracchānakathaṁ kathessanti, seyyathidaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics enter the village at the wrong time, sit down in the public meeting hall, and talk about such pointless things? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājakathaṁ corakathaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itibhavābhavakathaṁ iti vā, seyyathāpi gihī kāmabhogino”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū vikāle gāmaṁ pavisitvā sabhāyaṁ nisīditvā anekavihitaṁ tiracchānakathaṁ kathessanti, seyyathidaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājakathaṁ corakathaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itibhavābhavakathaṁ iti vā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, vikāle gāmaṁ pavisitvā sabhāyaṁ nisīditvā anekavihitaṁ tiracchānakathaṁ kathetha, seyyathidaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājakathaṁ corakathaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itibhavābhavakathaṁ iti vā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, vikāle gāmaṁ pavisitvā sabhāyaṁ nisīditvā anekavihitaṁ tiracchānakathaṁ kathessatha, seyyathidaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājakathaṁ corakathaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itibhavābhavakathaṁ iti vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu vikāle gāmaṁ paviseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk enters an inhabited area at the wrong time, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū kosalesu janapade sāvatthiṁ gacchantā sāyaṁ aññataraṁ gāmaṁ upagacchiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a number of monks were walking through the Kosalan country on their way to Sāvatthī, when one evening they came to a certain village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā te bhikkhū passitvā etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People saw them and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pavisatha, bhante”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, please enter the village.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ vikāle gāmaṁ pavisitun”ti kukkuccāyantā na pavisiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But knowing that entering a village at the wrong time had been prohibited by the Buddha and being afraid of wrongdoing, they declined. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Corā te bhikkhū acchindiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so thieves robbed them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then went to Sāvatthī and told the monks what had happened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, āpucchā vikāle gāmaṁ pavisituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to enter an inhabited area at the wrong time after taking leave. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu anāpucchā vikāle gāmaṁ paviseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk, without taking leave, enters an inhabited area at the wrong time, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu kosalesu janapade sāvatthiṁ gacchanto sāyaṁ aññataraṁ gāmaṁ upagacchi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a monk was walking through the Kosalan country on his way to Sāvatthī, when one evening he came to a certain village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā taṁ bhikkhuṁ passitvā etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People saw him and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pavisatha, bhante”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, please enter the village.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ anāpucchā vikāle gāmaṁ pavisitun”ti kukkuccāyanto na pāvisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But knowing that entering a village at the wrong time without taking leave had been prohibited by the Buddha and being afraid of wrongdoing, he declined. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Corā taṁ bhikkhuṁ acchindiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so thieves robbed him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then went to Sāvatthī and told the monks what had happened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, santaṁ bhikkhuṁ āpucchā vikāle gāmaṁ pavisituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to enter an inhabited area at the wrong time after taking leave of an available monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā vikāle gāmaṁ paviseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk, when a monk is available, enters an inhabited area at the wrong time without taking leave of him, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu ahinā daṭṭho hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a monk was bitten by a snake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu “aggiṁ āharissāmī”ti gāmaṁ gacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Another monk went to the village to get fire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then remembered </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā vikāle gāmaṁ pavisitun”ti kukkuccāyanto na pāvisi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">that the Buddha has prohibited entering a village at the wrong time without taking leave of an available monk. And being afraid of wrongdoing, he did not enter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, tathārūpe accāyike karaṇīye santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā vikāle gāmaṁ pavisituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to enter an inhabited area at the wrong time without taking leave of an available monk if there is some appropriate urgent business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā vikāle gāmaṁ paviseyya, aññatra tathārūpā accāyikā karaṇīyā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk, when another monk is available, enters an inhabited area at the wrong time without taking leave of him, except if there is some appropriate urgent business, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santo nāma bhikkhu</span></p>
<p class="p3">An available monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkā hoti āpucchā pavisituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is able to take leave of him and then enter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asanto nāma bhikkhu</span></p>
<p class="p3">No available monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti āpucchā pavisituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is not able to take leave and then enter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikālo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the wrong time: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhanhike vītivatte yāva aruṇuggamanā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the middle of the day has passed, until dawn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāmaṁ paviseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Enters an inhabited area: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parikkhittassa gāmassa parikkhepaṁ atikkamantassa āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he crosses the boundary of an enclosed inhabited area, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittassa gāmassa upacāraṁ okkamantassa āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he enters the vicinity of an unenclosed inhabited area, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra tathārūpā accāyikā karaṇīyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except if there is some appropriate urgent business: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā tathārūpaṁ accāyikaṁ karaṇīyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless there is some appropriate urgent business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikāle vikālasaññī santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā gāmaṁ pavisati, aññatra tathārūpā accāyikā karaṇīyā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the wrong time, and he perceives it as such, and he enters an inhabited area without taking leave of an available monk, except if there is some appropriate urgent business, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikāle vematiko santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā gāmaṁ pavisati, aññatra tathārūpā accāyikā karaṇīyā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the wrong time, but he is unsure of it, and he enters an inhabited area without taking leave of an available monk, except if there is some appropriate urgent business, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikāle kālasaññī santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā gāmaṁ pavisati, aññatra tathārūpā accāyikā karaṇīyā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the wrong time, but he perceives it as the right time, and he enters an inhabited area without taking leave of an available monk, except if there is some appropriate urgent business, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāle vikālasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the right time, but he perceives it as the wrong time, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāle vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the right time, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāle kālasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the right time, and he perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathārūpe accāyike karaṇīye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is some appropriate urgent business; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṁ bhikkhuṁ āpucchā pavisati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he enters after taking leave of an available monk; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asantaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā pavisati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he enters without taking leave when there is no available monk; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antarārāmaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is going between monasteries; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunupassayaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is going to the dwelling place of nuns; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">titthiyaseyyaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is going to the dwelling place of the monastics of another religion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭikkamanaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is returning to the monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāmena maggo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the road goes via an inhabited area; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikālagāmappavisanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on entering an inhabited area at the wrong time, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
