<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc16_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">16. Anupakhajjasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">16. The training rule on encroaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū varaseyyāyo palibundhenti, therā bhikkhū vuṭṭhāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six had taken possession of the best sleeping places. When the the senior monks evicted them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">they thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kena nu kho mayaṁ upāyena idheva vassaṁ vaseyyāmā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can we get to stay here during the rainy season?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū there bhikkhū anupakhajja seyyaṁ kappenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then arranged their sleeping places so as to encroach on the senior monks, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yassa sambādho bhavissati so pakkamissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whoever feels crowded will leave.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū there bhikkhū anupakhajja seyyaṁ kappessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six arrange their sleeping places so as to encroach on the senior monks?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, there bhikkhū anupakhajja seyyaṁ kappethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, there bhikkhū anupakhajja seyyaṁ kappessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu saṅghike vihāre jānaṁ pubbupagataṁ bhikkhuṁ anupakhajja seyyaṁ kappeyya— yassa sambādho bhavissati so pakkamissatī’ti, etadeva paccayaṁ karitvā anaññaṁ, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If, in a dwelling belonging to the Sangha, a monk arranges his sleeping place in a way that encroaches on a monk that he knows arrived there before him, with the intention that anyone who feels crowded will leave, and he does so only for this reason and no other, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">…The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghiko nāma vihāro</span></p>
<p class="p3">A dwelling belonging to the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghassa dinno hoti pariccatto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">given to the Sangha, given up to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuḍḍhoti jānāti, gilānoti jānāti, saṅghena dinnoti jānāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows that he is senior, he knows that he is sick, he knows that it was given to him by the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupakhajjāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To encroach on: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupavisitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">enters after. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyaṁ kappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Arranges his sleeping place: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mañcassa vā pīṭhassa vā pavisantassa vā nikkhamantassa vā upacāre seyyaṁ santharati vā santharāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he puts out his sleeping place in the vicinity of the bed, the bench, the entrance, or the exit, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he sits down or lies down on it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadeva paccayaṁ karitvā anaññanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He does so only for this reason and no other: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na añño koci paccayo hoti anupakhajja seyyaṁ kappetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is no other reason for arranging his sleeping place in a way that encroaches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike saṅghikasaññī anupakhajja seyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, and he perceives it as such, and he arranges his sleeping place there in a way that encroaches, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike vematiko anupakhajja seyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he is unsure of it, and he arranges his sleeping place there in a way that encroaches, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike puggalikasaññī anupakhajja seyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he perceives it as belonging to an individual, and he arranges his sleeping place there in a way that encroaches, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañcassa vā pīṭhassa vā pavisantassa vā nikkhamantassa vā upacāraṁ ṭhapetvā seyyaṁ santharati vā santharāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he puts out his sleeping place, or has it put out, anywhere apart from the vicinity of the bed, the bench, the entrance, or the exit, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he sits down or lies down on it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihārassa upacāre vā upaṭṭhānasālāyaṁ vā maṇḍape vā rukkhamūle vā ajjhokāse vā seyyaṁ santharati vā santharāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he puts out his sleeping place, or has it put out, in the vicinity of a dwelling, in an assembly hall, under a roof-cover, at the foot of a tree, or out in the open, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he sits down or lies down on it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike saṅghikasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he perceives it as belonging to the Sangha, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike puggalikasaññī aññassa puggalike āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, and he perceives it as such, but that individual is not himself, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attano puggalike anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to himself, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilāno pavisati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he enters because he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sītena vā uṇhena vā pīḷito pavisati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he enters because he is feeling cold or hot; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupakhajjasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on encroaching, the sixth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
