<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np27_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">27. Mahāpesakārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">27. The long training rule on weavers </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro puriso pavāsaṁ gacchanto pajāpatiṁ etadavoca—“suttaṁ dhārayitvā amukassa tantavāyassa dehi, cīvaraṁ vāyāpetvā nikkhipa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">a man who was going away said to his wife, “Please weigh some thread, take it to the weavers, get them to weave robe-cloth, and put the robe-cloth aside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āgato ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When I return, I’ll give it to Venerable Upananda.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho aññataro piṇḍacāriko bhikkhu tassa purisassa imaṁ vācaṁ bhāsamānassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An alms-collecting monk heard that man speaking those words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu yenāyasmā upanando sakyaputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—“mahāpuññosi tvaṁ, āvuso upananda,</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then went to Upananda the Sakyan and said, “Upananda, you have much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amukasmiṁ okāse aññataro puriso pavāsaṁ gacchanto pajāpatiṁ etadavoca—‘suttaṁ dhārayitvā amukassa tantavāyassa dehi, cīvaraṁ vāyāpetvā nikkhipa, āgato ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In such-and-such a place I heard a man, as he was going away, tell his wife to get robe-cloth woven so that he could give it to you when he returned.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthāvuso, maṁ so upaṭṭhāko”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“He’s my supporter.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sopi kho tantavāyo āyasmato upanandassa sakyaputtassa upaṭṭhāko hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the weaver was Upananda’s supporter too. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto yena so tantavāyo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ tantavāyaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Upananda then went to that weaver and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ kho, āvuso, cīvaraṁ maṁ uddissa viyyati; āyatañca karohi vitthatañca. Appitañca suvītañca suppavāyitañca suvilekhitañca suvitacchitañca karohī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This robe-cloth that you’re weaving for me, make it long and wide. And make it closely woven, well-woven, well-stretched, well-scraped, and well-combed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ete kho me, bhante, suttaṁ dhārayitvā adaṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, they’ve already weighed the thread and given it to me, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iminā suttena cīvaraṁ vināhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">telling me to weave the robe-cloth with that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na, bhante, sakkā āyataṁ vā vitthataṁ vā appitaṁ vā kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I won’t be able to make it long, wide, or closely woven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkā ca kho, bhante, suvītañca suppavāyitañca suvilekhitañca suvitacchitañca kātun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But I’m able to make it well-woven, well-stretched, well-scraped, and well-combed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iṅgha tvaṁ, āvuso, āyatañca karohi vitthatañca appitañca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just make it long, wide, and closely woven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tena suttena paṭibaddhaṁ bhavissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There’ll be enough thread.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so tantavāyo yathābhataṁ suttaṁ tante upanetvā yena sā itthī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—“suttena, ayye, attho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, when all the thread had been used up, that weaver went to that woman and said, “Madam, I need more thread.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu tvaṁ ayyo mayā vutto—‘iminā suttena cīvaraṁ vināhī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But didn’t I tell you to weave the robe-cloth with that thread?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccāhaṁ, ayye, tayā vutto—‘iminā suttena cīvaraṁ vināhī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You did. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca maṁ ayyo upanando evamāha—‘iṅgha tvaṁ, āvuso, āyatañca karohi vitthatañca appitañca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">But Venerable Upananda told me to make it long, wide, and closely woven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na tena suttena paṭibaddhaṁ bhavissatī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he said there would be enough thread.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī yattakaṁyeva suttaṁ paṭhamaṁ adāsi tattakaṁ pacchā adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That woman then gave him as much thread again as she had done the first time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto—“so kira puriso pavāsato āgato”ti. Atha kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto yena tassa purisassa nivesanaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When Upananda heard that the husband had returned from his travels, he went to his house and sat down on the prepared seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso yenāyasmā upanando sakyaputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That man approached him, bowed, and sat down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so puriso pajāpatiṁ etadavoca—“vītaṁ taṁ cīvaran”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then said to his wife, “Has the robe-cloth been woven?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāyya, vītaṁ taṁ cīvaran”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, it has.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āhara, ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please bring it. I’ll give it to Venerable Upananda.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī taṁ cīvaraṁ nīharitvā sāmikassa datvā etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She then got the robe-cloth, gave it to her husband, and told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso āyasmato upanandassa sakyaputtassa cīvaraṁ datvā ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving the robe-cloth to Upananda, he complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahicchā ime samaṇā sakyaputtiyā asantuṭṭhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These Sakyan monastics have great desires; they’re not content. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nayime sukarā cīvarena acchādetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s no easy matter to give them robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma ayyo upanando mayā pubbe appavārito tantavāye upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could Venerable Upananda go to the weavers and say what kind of robe-cloth he wanted without first being invited by me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa purisassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto pubbe appavārito gahapatikassa tantavāye upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Upananda go to a householder’s weavers and say what kind of robe-cloth he wants without first being invited?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Upananda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, pubbe appavārito gahapatikassa tantavāye upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ñātako te, upananda, aññātako”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is he a relative of yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātako, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātako, moghapurisa, aññātakassa na jānāti patirūpaṁ vā appatirūpaṁ vā santaṁ vā asantaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, people who are unrelated don’t know what’s appropriate and inappropriate, what’s good and bad, in dealing with each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, pubbe appavārito aññātakassa gahapatikassa tantavāye upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And still you did this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhuṁ paneva uddissa aññātako gahapati vā gahapatānī vā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpeyya, tatra ce so bhikkhu pubbe appavārito tantavāye upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a male or female householder is having robe-cloth woven by weavers for an unrelated monk and, without first being invited, that monk goes to those weavers and specifies the kind of robe-cloth he wants, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṁ kho, āvuso, cīvaraṁ maṁ uddissa viyyati. Āyatañca karotha vitthatañca. Appitañca suvītañca suppavāyitañca suvilekhitañca suvitacchitañca karotha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This robe-cloth that you are weaving for me, make it long and wide; make it closely woven, well-woven, well-stretched, well-scraped, and well-combed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appeva nāma mayampi āyasmantānaṁ kiñcimattaṁ anupadajjeyyāmā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and perhaps I will even give you a small gift,’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca so bhikkhu vatvā kiñcimattaṁ anupadajjeyya antamaso piṇḍapātamattampi, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then, in saying that and afterwards giving them a small gift, even if it is only a bit of almsfood, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuṁ paneva uddissāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">For a monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhussatthāya bhikkhuṁ ārammaṇaṁ karitvā bhikkhuṁ acchādetukāmo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the benefit of a monk; making a monk the object of consideration, one wants to give to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unrelated: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātito vā pitito vā yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā asambaddho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who is not a descendant of one’s male ancestors going back seven generations, either on the mother’s side or on the father’s side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A male householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any man who lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapatānī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A female householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any woman who lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tantavāyehīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">By weavers: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pesakārehi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">by those who weave. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Robe-cloth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ vikappanupagaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robe-cloth, but not smaller than what can be transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāyāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is having woven: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vināpeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">is causing to weave. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra ce so bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ bhikkhuṁ uddissa cīvaraṁ viyyati so bhikkhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk the robe-cloth is being woven for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe appavāritoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without first being invited: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbe avutto hoti— “kīdisena te, bhante, cīvarena attho, kīdisaṁ te cīvaraṁ vāyāpemī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">without it first being said, “Venerable, what kind of robe-cloth do you need? What kind of robe-cloth should I get woven for you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tantavāye upasaṅkamitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Goes to those weavers: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gharaṁ gantvā yattha katthaci upasaṅkamitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having gone to their house, having gone up to them wherever. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjeyyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Specifies the kind of robe-cloth he wants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ kho, āvuso, cīvaraṁ maṁ uddissa viyyati, āyatañca karotha vitthatañca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This robe-cloth that you are weaving for me, make it long and wide; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appitañca suvītañca suppavāyitañca suvilekhitañca suvitacchitañca karotha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">make it closely woven, well-woven, well-stretched, well-scraped, and well-combed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appeva nāma mayampi āyasmantānaṁ kiñcimattaṁ anupadajjeyyāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and perhaps I will even give you a small gift.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca so bhikkhu vatvā kiñcimattaṁ anupadajjeyya antamaso piṇḍapātamattampīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in saying that and afterwards giving them a small gift, even if it is only a bit of almsfood—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piṇḍapāto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Almsfood: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāgupi bhattampi khādanīyampi cuṇṇapiṇḍopi dantakaṭṭhampi dasikasuttampi, antamaso dhammampi bhaṇati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">rice porridge, a meal, fresh food, a bit of bath powder, a tooth cleaner, a piece of string, and even if he gives a teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vacanena āyataṁ vā vitthataṁ vā appitaṁ vā karoti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the weaver makes it long or wide or closely woven because of the monk’s statement, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets the robe-cloth, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-cloth should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ pubbe appavārito aññātakassa gahapatikassa tantavāye upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpannaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe-cloth, for which I went to the weavers of an unrelated householder and said what kind of robe-cloth I wanted without first being invited, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe-cloth back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake aññātakasaññī pubbe appavārito gahapatikassa tantavāye upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is unrelated and the monk perceives them as such and, without first being invited, he goes to their weavers and specifies the kind of robe-cloth he wants, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake vematiko pubbe appavārito gahapatikassa tantavāye upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is unrelated, but the monk is unsure of it and, without first being invited, he goes to their weavers and specifies the kind of robe-cloth he wants, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake ñātakasaññī pubbe appavārito gahapatikassa tantavāye upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is unrelated, but the monk perceives them as related and, without first being invited, he goes to their weavers and specifies the kind of robe-cloth he wants, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake añātakasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is related, but the monk perceives them as unrelated, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is related, but the monk is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake ñātakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householder is related and the monk perceives them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of his own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahagghaṁ vāyāpetukāmassa appagghaṁ vāyāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if someone wants to have expensive robe-cloth woven, but he has them weave inexpensive robe-cloth instead; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāpesakārasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The long training rule on weavers, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
