<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Aniyatakaṇḍa - The chapter on undetermined offenses </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-ay1_root-pli-ms.j. Aniyatakaṇḍa - The chapter on undetermined offenses </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">1. Paṭhamaaniyatasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">1. The first undetermined training rule </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho panāyasmanto dve aniyatā dhammā uddesaṁ āgacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerables, these two undetermined rules come up for recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā udāyī sāvatthiyaṁ kulūpako hoti, bahukāni kulāni upasaṅkamati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Udāyī was associating with and visiting a number of families in Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato udāyissa upaṭṭhākakulassa kumārikā aññatarassa kulassa kumārakassa dinnā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion one of the families that supported him gave their daughter in marriage to the son of another family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena taṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā manusse pucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards Venerable Udāyī robed up in the morning, took his bowl and robe, and went to the first of those families. When he arrived, he asked </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kahaṁ itthannāmā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">where the daughter was, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he was told </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dinnā, bhante, amukassa kulassa kumārakassā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that she had been given to another family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tampi kho kulaṁ āyasmato udāyissa upaṭṭhākaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That family too supported Udāyī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī yena taṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā manusse pucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then went there and again asked </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kahaṁ itthannāmā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">where the girl was. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“esāyya, ovarake nisinnā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“She’s sitting in her room.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī yena sā kumārikā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā tassā kumārikāya saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho paṭicchanne āsane alaṅkammaniye nisajjaṁ kappesi kālayuttaṁ samullapanto kālayuttaṁ dhammaṁ bhaṇanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He went up to that girl, and the two of them sat down alone on a private and concealed seat suitable for action. When they were able, they chatted; otherwise he gave her a teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena visākhā migāramātā bahuputtā hoti bahunattā arogaputtā aroganattā abhimaṅgalasammatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Visākhā Migāramātā had many healthy children and grandchildren. As a consequence, she was considered auspicious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā yaññesu chaṇesu ussavesu visākhaṁ migāramātaraṁ paṭhamaṁ bhojenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At sacrifices, ceremonies, and celebrations people would feed Visākhā first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho visākhā migāramātā nimantitā taṁ kulaṁ agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then she had been invited to that family that supported Udāyī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho visākhā migāramātā āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ tassā kumārikāya saddhiṁ ekaṁ ekāya raho paṭicchanne āsane alaṅkammaniye nisinnaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she arrived, she saw him sitting alone with that girl, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and she said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ, bhante, nacchannaṁ nappatirūpaṁ yaṁ ayyo mātugāmena saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho paṭicchanne āsane alaṅkammaniye nisajjaṁ kappeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, it’s not appropriate for you to sit alone with a woman on a private and concealed seat suitable for action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñcāpi, bhante, ayyo anatthiko tena dhammena, api ca dussaddhāpayā appasannā manussā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You may not be aiming at that act, but it’s hard to convince people with little confidence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho āyasmā udāyī visākhāya migāramātuyā vuccamāno nādiyi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But Udāyī did not listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho visākhā migāramātā nikkhamitvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After leaving, Visākhā told the monks what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā udāyī mātugāmena saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho paṭicchanne āsane alaṅkammaniye nisajjaṁ kappessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Udāyī sit alone with a woman on a private and concealed seat suitable for action?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking Udāyī in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Udāyī: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, udāyi, mātugāmena saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho paṭicchanne āsane alaṅkammaniye nisajjaṁ kappesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Udāyī, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, mātugāmena saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho paṭicchanne āsane alaṅkammaniye nisajjaṁ kappessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu mātugāmena saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho paṭicchanne āsane alaṅkammaniye nisajjaṁ kappeyya, tamenaṁ saddheyyavacasā upāsikā disvā</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk sits alone with a woman on a private and concealed seat suitable for action, and a trustworthy female lay follower sees him </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṁ dhammānaṁ aññatarena vadeyya—pārājikena vā saṅghādisesena vā pācittiyena vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and accuses him of an offense entailing expulsion, an offense entailing suspension, or an offense entailing confession, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajjaṁ bhikkhu paṭijānamāno tiṇṇaṁ dhammānaṁ aññatarena kāretabbo—pārājikena vā saṅghādisesena vā pācittiyena vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then, if he admits to the sitting, he is to be dealt with according to one of these three </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena vā sā saddheyyavacasā upāsikā vadeyya, tena so bhikkhu kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">or according to what that trustworthy female lay follower has said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ dhammo aniyato”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This rule is undetermined.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussitthī, na yakkhī na petī na tiracchānagatā. Antamaso tadahujātāpi dārikā, pageva mahattarī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human female, not a female spirit, not a female ghost, not a female animal; even a girl born that very day, let alone an older one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko ekāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Alone: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu ceva hoti mātugāmo ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">just the monk and the woman. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Raho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Private: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhussa raho, sotassa raho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is private to the eye and there is private to the ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhussa raho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Private to the eye: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti akkhiṁ vā nikhaṇīyamāne bhamukaṁ vā ukkhipīyamāne sīsaṁ vā ukkhipīyamāne passituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one is unable to see them winking, raising an eyebrow, or nodding. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotassa raho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Private to the ear: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti pakatikathā sotuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one is unable to hear ordinary speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭicchannaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Concealed seat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsanaṁ kuṭṭena vā kavāṭena vā kilañjena vā sāṇipākārena vā rukkhena vā thambhena vā kotthaḷiyā vā yena kenaci paṭicchannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is concealed by a wall, a screen, a door, a cloth screen, a tree, a pillar, a grain container, or anything else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alaṅkammaniyeti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suitable for action: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkā hoti methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one is able to have sexual intercourse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajjaṁ kappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sits: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātugāme nisinne bhikkhu upanisinno vā hoti upanipanno vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk sits down or lies down next to the seated woman. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu nisinne mātugāmo upanisinno vā hoti upanipanno vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The woman sits down or lies down next to the seated monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho vā nisinnā honti ubho vā nipannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Both are seated or both are lying down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddheyyavacasā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Trustworthy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āgataphalā abhisametāvinī viññātasāsanā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has attained the fruit, she has broken through, she has understood the Teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Female lay follower: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhaṁ saraṇaṁ gatā, dhammaṁ saraṇaṁ gatā, saṅghaṁ saraṇaṁ gatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Teaching, and the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sees: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having seen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiṇṇaṁ dhammānaṁ aññatarena vadeyya— pārājikena vā saṅghādisesena vā pācittiyena vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him of an offense entailing expulsion, an offense entailing suspension, or an offense entailing confession, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajjaṁ bhikkhu paṭijānamāno tiṇṇaṁ dhammānaṁ aññatarena kāretabbo— pārājikena vā saṅghādisesena vā pācittiyena vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then, if he admits to the sitting, he is to be dealt with according to one of these three </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena vā sā saddheyyavacasā upāsikā vadeyya tena so bhikkhu kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">or according to what that trustworthy female lay follower has said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nisinno mātugāmassa methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you seated, having sexual intercourse with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ca taṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiyā kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he admits to that, then he is to be dealt with for the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nisinno mātugāmassa methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you seated, having sexual intercourse with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccāhaṁ nisinno, no ca kho methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevin”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true that I was seated, but I didn’t have sexual intercourse,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nisajjāya kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the sitting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nisinno mātugāmassa methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you seated, having sexual intercourse with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nisinno, api ca kho nipanno”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t seated, but lying down,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nipajjāya kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the lying down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nisinno mātugāmassa methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you seated, having sexual intercourse with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nisinno, api ca kho ṭhito”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t seated, but standing,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is not to be dealt with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nipanno mātugāmassa methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you lying down, having sexual intercourse with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ca taṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiyā kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he admits to that, then he is to be dealt with for the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nipanno mātugāmassa methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you lying down, having sexual intercourse with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccāhaṁ nipanno, no ca kho methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevin”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true that I was lying down, but I didn’t have sexual intercourse,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nipajjāya kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the lying down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nipanno mātugāmassa methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you lying down, having sexual intercourse with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nipanno, api ca kho nisinno”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t lying down, but seated,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nisajjāya kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the sitting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nipanno mātugāmassa methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you lying down, having sexual intercourse with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nipanno, api ca kho ṭhito”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t lying down, but standing,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is not to be dealt with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nisinno mātugāmena saddhiṁ kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajjanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you seated, making physical contact with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ca taṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiyā kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he admits to that, then he is to be dealt with for the offense. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccāhaṁ nisinno no ca kho kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajjin”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true that I was seated, but I didn’t make physical contact,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nisajjāya kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the sitting. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nisinno, api ca kho nipanno”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t seated, but lying down,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nipajjāya kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the lying down. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nisinno, api ca kho ṭhito”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t seated, but standing,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is not to be dealt with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho nipanno mātugāmena saddhiṁ kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajjanto”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you lying down, making physical contact with a woman,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ca taṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiyā kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he admits to that, then he is to be dealt with for the offense. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccāhaṁ nipanno, no ca kho kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajjin”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true that I was lying down, but I didn’t make physical contact,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nipajjāya kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the lying down. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nipanno, api ca kho nisinno”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t lying down, but seated,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nisajjāya kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the sitting. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nipanno, api ca kho ṭhito”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t lying down, but standing,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is not to be dealt with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho mātugāmena saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho paṭicchanne āsane alaṅkammaniye nisinno”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you seated alone with a woman on a private and concealed seat suitable for action,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ca taṁ paṭijānāti, nisajjāya kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he admits to that, then he is to be dealt with for the sitting. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nisinno, api ca kho nipanno”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t seated, but lying down,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nipajjāya kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the lying down. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nisinno, api ca kho ṭhito”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t seated, but standing,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is not to be dealt with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accuses him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo mayā diṭṭho mātugāmena saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho paṭicchanne āsane alaṅkammaniye nipanno”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen you lying down alone with a woman on a private and concealed seat suitable for action,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ca taṁ paṭijānāti, nipajjāya kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he admits to that, then he is to be dealt with for the lying down. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nipanno, api ca kho nisinno”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t lying down, but seated,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nisajjāya kāretabbo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is to be dealt with for the sitting. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāhaṁ nipanno, api ca kho ṭhito”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I wasn’t lying down, but standing,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then he is not to be dealt with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniyatoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Undetermined: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na niyato, pārājikaṁ vā saṅghādiseso vā pācittiyaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">not determined. It is either an offense entailing expulsion, an offense entailing suspension, or an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanaṁ paṭijānāti, nisajjaṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiyā kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he admits to going, and he admits to sitting, and he admits to an offense, he is to be dealt with for the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanaṁ paṭijānāti, nisajjaṁ na paṭijānāti, āpattiṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiyā kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he admits to going, but he does not admit to sitting, yet he admits to an offense, he is to be dealt with for the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanaṁ paṭijānāti, nisajjaṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiṁ na paṭijānāti, nisajjāya kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he admits to going, and he admits to sitting, but he does not admit to an offense, he is to be dealt with for the sitting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanaṁ paṭijānāti, nisajjaṁ na paṭijānāti, āpattiṁ na paṭijānāti, na kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he admits to going, but he does not admit to sitting, nor does he admit to an offense, he is not to be dealt with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanaṁ na paṭijānāti, nisajjaṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiyā kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not admit to going, but he admits to sitting, and he admits to an offense, he is to be dealt with for the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanaṁ na paṭijānāti, nisajjaṁ na paṭijānāti, āpattiṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiyā kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not admit to going, nor does he admit to sitting, but he admits to an offense, he is to be dealt with for the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanaṁ na paṭijānāti, nisajjaṁ paṭijānāti, āpattiṁ na paṭijānāti, nisajjāya kāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not admit to going, but he admits to sitting, yet he does not admit to an offense, he is to be dealt with for the sitting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanaṁ na paṭijānāti, nisajjaṁ na paṭijānāti, āpattiṁ na paṭijānāti, na kāretabboti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not admit to going, nor does he admit to sitting, nor does he admit to an offense, he is not to be dealt with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamo aniyato niṭṭhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first undetermined offense is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
