<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc29_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">29. Paripācitasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">29. The training rule on had prepared </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī aññatarassa kulassa kulūpikā hoti niccabhattikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā was associating with a family from which she received a regular meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena ca gahapatinā therā bhikkhū nimantitā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now on one occasion the head of that family had invited some senior monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho thullanandā bhikkhunī pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena taṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ gahapatiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">On the same day, the nun Thullanandā robed up in the morning, took her bowl and robe, and went to that family. And she asked the head of the family, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kimidaṁ, gahapati, pahūtaṁ khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ paṭiyattan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why have you prepared so much food?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Therā mayā, ayye, nimantitā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because, Venerable, I’ve invited the senior monks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ke pana te, gahapati, therā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But who are those senior monks?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayyo sāriputto ayyo mahāmoggallāno ayyo mahākaccāno ayyo mahākoṭṭhiko ayyo mahākappino ayyo mahācundo ayyo anuruddho ayyo revato ayyo upāli ayyo ānando ayyo rāhulo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Sāriputta, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, Venerable Mahākaccāna, Venerable Mahākoṭṭhika, Venerable Mahākappina, Venerable Mahācunda, Venerable Anuruddha, Venerable Revata, Venerable Upāli, Venerable Ānanda, and Venerable Rāhula.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ pana tvaṁ, gahapati, mahānāge tiṭṭhamāne ceṭake nimantesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But why do you invite such inferior monks instead of the great ones?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ke pana te, ayye, mahānāgā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who are these great monks?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayyo devadatto ayyo kokāliko ayyo kaṭamodakatissako ayyo khaṇḍadeviyā putto ayyo samuddadatto”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Devadatta, Venerable Kokālika, Venerable Kaṭamodakatissaka, Venerable Khaṇḍadeviyā-putta, and Venerable Samuddadatta.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ carahi thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā antarā kathā vippakatā, atha te therā bhikkhū pavisiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">While this conversation was taking place, the senior monks entered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ mahānāgā kho tayā, gahapati, nimantitā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā said, “Is it true that you’ve invited these great monks?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idāneva kho tvaṁ, ayye, ceṭake akāsi; idāni mahānāge”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just before you called them inferior and now you call them great.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gharato ca nikkaḍḍhi, niccabhattañca pacchindi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And that lay person threw her out of the house and made an end of her regular meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized Devadatta, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma devadatto jānaṁ bhikkhuniparipācitaṁ piṇḍapātaṁ bhuñjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Devadatta eat almsfood knowing that a nun had it prepared?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, devadatta, jānaṁ bhikkhuniparipācitaṁ piṇḍapātaṁ bhuñjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Devadatta, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, jānaṁ bhikkhuniparipācitaṁ piṇḍapātaṁ bhuñjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ bhikkhuniparipācitaṁ piṇḍapātaṁ bhuñjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats almsfood knowing that a nun had it prepared, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu rājagahā pabbajito ñātikulaṁ agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a monk who had earlier left Rājagaha returned to see his family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā—“cirassampi bhadanto āgato”ti sakkaccaṁ bhattaṁ akaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because it was long since he had last returned, people prepared food for him respectfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kulassa kulūpikā bhikkhunī te manusse etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the nun who was associating with that family said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dethayyassa, āvuso, bhattan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give food to that monk.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ jānaṁ bhikkhuniparipācitaṁ piṇḍapātaṁ bhuñjitun”ti kukkuccāyanto na paṭiggahesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha has prohibited us from eating almsfood knowing that a nun had it prepared,” and being afraid of wrongdoing, he did not accept it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāsakkhi piṇḍāya carituṁ, chinnabhatto ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And because he was unable to walk for alms, he missed his meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu ārāmaṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After returning to the monastery, he told the monks what had happened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, pubbe gihisamārambhe jānaṁ bhikkhuniparipācitaṁ piṇḍapātaṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to eat almsfood knowing that a nun had it prepared if the householder had intended to prepare it anyway. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ bhikkhuniparipācitaṁ piṇḍapātaṁ bhuñjeyya, aññatra pubbe gihisamārambhā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats almsfood knowing that a nun had it prepared, except if the householder had intended to prepare it anyway, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti aññe vā tassa ārocenti sā vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the nun has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripāceti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has it prepared: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbe adātukāmānaṁ akattukāmānaṁ— “ayyo bhāṇako, ayyo bahussuto, ayyo suttantiko, ayyo vinayadharo, ayyo dhammakathiko, detha ayyassa, karotha ayyassā”ti esā paripāceti nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she says to those who do not already want to give or want to prepare, “This monk is a reciter,” “This monk is learned,” “This monk is an expert on the discourses,” “This monk is an expert on the Monastic Law,” “This monk is an expounder of the Teaching;” “Give to this monk,” “Prepare for this monk”—this is called “has it prepared”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piṇḍapāto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Almsfood: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññataraṁ bhojanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any of the five cooked foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra pubbe gihisamārambhāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except if the householder had intended to prepare it anyway: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā gihisamārambhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless the householder had intended to prepare it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihisamārambho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The householder had intended to prepare it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakā vā honti pavāritā vā pakatipaṭiyattaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they are relatives or they have invited or they give regularly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra pubbe gihisamārambhā bhuñjissāmīti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives it with the intention of eating it, except if the householder had intended to prepare it anyway, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripācite paripācitasaññī bhuñjati, aññatra pubbe gihisamārambhā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a nun had it prepared, and he perceives as such, and he eats it, except if the householder had intended to prepare it anyway, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripācite vematiko bhuñjati, aññatra pubbe gihisamārambhā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a nun had it prepared, but he is unsure of it, and he eats it, except if the householder had intended to prepare it anyway, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripācite aparipācitasaññī bhuñjati, aññatra pubbe gihisamārambhā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a nun had it prepared, but he does not perceive it as such, and he eats it, except if the householder had intended to prepare it anyway, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoupasampannāya paripācitaṁ bhuñjati, aññatra pubbe gihisamārambhā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a nun who is fully ordained only on one side had it prepared, and he eats it, except if the householder had intended to prepare it anyway, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparipācite paripācitasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a nun did not have it prepared, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparipācite vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a nun did not have it prepared, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparipācite aparipācitasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a nun did not have it prepared, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbe gihisamārambhe,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the householder had intended to prepare it anyway; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhamānā paripāceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a trainee nun has it prepared; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇerī paripāceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a novice nun has it prepared; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni ṭhapetvā sabbattha anāpatti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is anything apart from the five cooked food; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripācitasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on had prepared, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
