<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc28_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">28. Nāvābhiruhanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">28. The training rule on boarding boats </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six were boarding boats by appointment with nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yatheva mayaṁ sapajāpatikā nāvāya kīḷāma, evamevime samaṇā sakyaputtiyā bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya nāvāya kīḷantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just as we enjoy ourselves on boats with our wives, so these Sakyan monastics make appointments with the nuns and then enjoy themselves on boats.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruhissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six board boats by appointments with nuns?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruhathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruhissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruheyya, uddhaṅgāminiṁ vā adhogāminiṁ vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk boards a boat by appointment with a nun, either to go upstream or downstream, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū ca bhikkhuniyo ca sāketā sāvatthiṁ addhānamaggappaṭipannā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a number of monks and nuns were traveling from Sāketa to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antarāmagge nadī taritabbā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On the way they needed to cross a river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo te bhikkhū etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns said to the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mayampi ayyehi saddhiṁ uttarissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Let’s cross together.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na, bhaginī, kappati bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruhituṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sisters, it’s not allowable for us to board a boat by appointment with a nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tumhe vā paṭhamaṁ uttaratha mayaṁ vā uttarissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Either you cross first, or we will.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayyā, bhante, aggapurisā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You have the higher status, Venerables. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyāva paṭhamaṁ uttarantū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go first.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tāsaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ pacchā uttarantīnaṁ corā acchindiṁsu ca dūsesuñca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But because the nuns crossed afterwards, they were robbed and raped by bandits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When they arrived at Sāvatthī they told the nuns there what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns then told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, tiriyaṁ taraṇāya bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruhituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to board a boat by appointment with a nun if it’s for the purpose of crossing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruheyya uddhaṅgāminiṁ vā adhogāminiṁ vā, aññatra tiriyaṁ taraṇāya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk boards a boat by appointment with a nun, either to go upstream or downstream, except for the purpose of crossing, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidhāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">By appointment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhiruhāma, bhagini, abhiruhāmāyya; abhiruhāmāyya, abhiruhāma, bhagini; ajja vā hiyyo vā pare vā abhiruhāmā”ti saṁvidahati āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes an appointment like this: he says, “Let’s board, Sister,” and she replies, “Yes, let’s board, Venerable;” or she says, “Lets’s board, Venerable,” and he replies, “Yes, let’s board, Sister;” or he says, “Let’s board today,” “Let’s board tomorrow,” “Let’s board the day after tomorrow,” then he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyā abhiruḷhe bhikkhu abhiruhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk boards when the nun has already boarded, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhumhi abhiruḷhe bhikkhunī abhiruhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the nun boards when the monks has already boarded, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho vā abhiruhanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they both board together, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaṅgāmininti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To go upstream: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujjavanikāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the purpose of going against the stream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhogāmininti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To go downstream: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ojavanikāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the purpose of going with the stream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra tiriyaṁ taraṇāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except for the purpose of crossing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā tiriyaṁ taraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless it is to go across. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kukkuṭasampāte gāme, gāmantare gāmantare āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the villages are a chicken’s flight apart, then for every next village he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agāmake araññe, aḍḍhayojane aḍḍhayojane āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it is an uninhabited area, a wilderness, then for every six kilometers he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidahite saṁvidahitasaññī ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruhati uddhaṅgāminiṁ vā adhogāminiṁ vā, aññatra tiriyaṁ taraṇāya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is an appointment, and he perceives that there is, and he boards a boat with a nun, either to go upstream or downstream, except for the purpose of crossing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidahite vematiko ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruhati uddhaṅgāminiṁ vā adhogāminiṁ vā, aññatra tiriyaṁ taraṇāya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is an appointment, but he is unsure of it, and he boards a boat with a nun, either to go upstream or downstream, except for the purpose of crossing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidahite asaṁvidahitasaññī ekaṁ nāvaṁ abhiruhati uddhaṅgāminiṁ vā adhogāminiṁ vā, aññatra tiriyaṁ taraṇāya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is an appointment, but he does not perceive that there is, and he boards a boat with a nun, either to go upstream or downstream, except for the purpose of crossing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu saṁvidahati, bhikkhunī na saṁvidahati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk makes an appointment, but the nun does not express her agreement, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṁvidahite saṁvidahitasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is no appointment, but he perceives that there is, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṁvidahite vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is no appointment, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṁvidahite, asaṁvidahitasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is no appointment, and he does not perceive that there is, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiriyaṁ taraṇāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the purpose of crossing; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṁvidahitvā abhiruhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they board without an appointment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunī saṁvidahati, bhikkhu na saṁvidahati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the nun has made an appointment, but he has not expressed his agreement; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">visaṅketena abhiruhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they board, but not according to the appointment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammissāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāvābhiruhanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on boarding boats, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
