<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc30_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">30. Rahonisajjasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">30. The training rule on sitting in private </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato udāyissa purāṇadutiyikā bhikkhunīsu pabbajitā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Udāyīʼs ex-wife became a nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā āyasmato udāyissa santike abhikkhaṇaṁ āgacchati, āyasmāpi udāyī tassā bhikkhuniyā santike abhikkhaṇaṁ gacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She often went to see Udāyī, and he often went to see her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā udāyī tassā bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho nisajjaṁ kappesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And Udāyī would sit in private alone with that nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā udāyī bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho nisajjaṁ kappessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Udāyī sit in private alone with a nun?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, udāyi, bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho nisajjaṁ kappesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Udāyī, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho nisajjaṁ kappessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ eko ekāya raho nisajjaṁ kappeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk sits in private alone with a nun, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko ekāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Alone: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu ceva hoti bhikkhunī ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">just the monk and the nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Raho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">In private: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhussa raho sotassa raho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is private to the eye and there is private to the ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhussa raho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Private to the eye: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti akkhiṁ vā nikhaṇīyamāne bhamukaṁ vā ukkhipīyamāne sīsaṁ vā ukkhipīyamāne passituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one is unable to see them winking, raising an eyebrow, or nodding. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotassa raho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Private to the ear: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti pakatikathā sotuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one is unable to hear ordinary speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajjaṁ kappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sits: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuniyā nisinnāya bhikkhu upanisinno vā hoti upanipanno vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monk sits down or lies down next to the seated nun, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu nisinne bhikkhunī upanisinnā vā hoti upanipannā vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the nun sits down or lies down next to the seated monk, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho vā nisinnā honti ubho vā nipannā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If both are seated or both are lying down, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Raho rahosaññī eko ekāya nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is private, and he perceives it as such, and he sits down alone with a nun, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Raho vematiko eko ekāya nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is private, but he is unsure of it, and he sits down alone with a nun, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Raho arahosaññī eko ekāya nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is private, but he does not perceive it as such, and he sits down alone with a nun, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Araho rahosaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not private, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Araho vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not private, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Araho arahosaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not private, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci viññū dutiyo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has a companion who understands; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṭṭhati na nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stands and does not sit down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">arahopekkho,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not seeking privacy; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññavihito nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sits down preoccupied with something else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rahonisajjasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on sitting in private, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavaggo tatiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third sub-chapter on the instruction is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asammataatthaṅgatū,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not appointed, set, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passayāmisadānena;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dwelling place, worldly gain, and with giving; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sibbati addhānaṁ nāvaṁ bhuñjeyya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">He sews, a road, a boat, should eat, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko ekāya te dasāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Alone: those are the ten.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
