<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc46_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on naked ascetics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">46. Cārittasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">46. The training rule on visiting </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato upanandassa sakyaputtassa upaṭṭhākakulaṁ āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ bhattena nimantesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a family that was supporting Venerable Upananda the Sakyan had invited him to a meal, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññepi bhikkhū bhattena nimantesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they had invited other monks too. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto purebhattaṁ, kulāni payirupāsati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But since Upananda was visiting other families before that meal, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū te manusse etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the other monks said to that family, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dethāvuso, bhattan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please give the meal.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āgametha, bhante, yāvāyyo upanando āgacchatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please wait, Sirs, until Venerable Upananda arrives.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho te bhikkhū …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho te bhikkhū te manusse etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time those monks said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dethāvuso, bhattaṁ; pure kālo atikkamatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please give the meal before it is too late.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi mayaṁ, bhante, bhattaṁ karimhā ayyassa upanandassa kāraṇā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But we prepared the meal because of Venerable Upananda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āgametha, bhante, yāvāyyo upanando āgacchatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please wait until he arrives.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto purebhattaṁ kulāni payirupāsitvā divā āgacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after visiting those families, Upananda arrived late, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū na cittarūpaṁ bhuñjiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and those monks did not eat as much as they had intended. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto nimantito sabhatto samāno purebhattaṁ kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Upananda visit families first when invited to a meal?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, nimantito sabhatto samāno purebhattaṁ kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, nimantito sabhatto samāno purebhattaṁ kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu nimantito sabhatto samāno purebhattaṁ kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who has been invited to a meal visits families beforehand, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato upanandassa sakyaputtassa upaṭṭhākakulaṁ saṅghassatthāya khādanīyaṁ pāhesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a family that was supporting Upananda sent fresh food to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyassa upanandassa dassetvā saṅghassa dātabban”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They instructed that the food should be shown to Upananda and then given to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto gāmaṁ piṇḍāya paviṭṭho hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But on that occasion Upananda had entered the village for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te manussā ārāmaṁ gantvā bhikkhū pucchiṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When those people arrived at the monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kahaṁ, bhante, ayyo upanando”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">they asked for Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Esāvuso, āyasmā upanando sakyaputto gāmaṁ piṇḍāya paviṭṭho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they were told where he was. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idaṁ, bhante, khādanīyaṁ ayyassa upanandassa dassetvā saṅghassa dātabban”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They said, “Venerables, after showing it to Venerable Upananda, this fresh food is to be given to the Sangha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks told the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">who then gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tena hi, bhikkhave, paṭiggahetvā nikkhipatha yāva upanando āgacchatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, monks, receive it and put it aside until Upananda returns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto—“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ purebhattaṁ kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjitun”ti pacchābhattaṁ kulāni payirupāsitvā divā paṭikkami, khādanīyaṁ ussāriyittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he heard that the Buddha had prohibited visiting families before the meal, Upananda visited them after the meal instead. As a consequence, he returned late to the monastery, and the food had to be returned to the donors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto pacchābhattaṁ kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Upananda visit families after the meal?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, pacchābhattaṁ kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, pacchābhattaṁ kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu nimantito sabhatto samāno purebhattaṁ vā pacchābhattaṁ vā kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who has been invited to a meal visits families beforehand or afterwards, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū cīvaradānasamaye kukkuccāyantā kulāni na payirupāsanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards it was the robe-giving season. But being afraid of wrongdoing, the monks did not visit families. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ parittaṁ uppajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result, they only got a small amount of robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, cīvaradānasamaye kulāni payirupāsituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to visit families during the robe-giving season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu nimantito sabhatto samāno purebhattaṁ vā pacchābhattaṁ vā kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjeyya, aññatra samayā, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who has been invited to a meal visits families beforehand or afterwards, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyaṁ samayo. Cīvaradānasamayo—ayaṁ tattha samayo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the appropriate occasion: it is the robe-giving season.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū cīvarakammaṁ karonti, attho ca hoti sūciyāpi suttenapi satthakenapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the monks were making robes, and they needed a needle, thread, and scissors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū kukkuccāyantā kulāni na payirupāsanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But being afraid of wrongdoing, they did not visit families. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, cīvarakārasamaye kulāni payirupāsituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to visit families at a time of making robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu nimantito sabhatto samāno purebhattaṁ vā pacchābhattaṁ vā kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjeyya, aññatra samayā, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who has been invited to a meal visits families beforehand or afterwards, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyaṁ samayo. Cīvaradānasamayo, cīvarakārasamayo—ayaṁ tattha samayo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the appropriate occasions: it is the robe-giving season; it is a time of making robes.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū gilānā honti, attho ca hoti bhesajjehi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards there were sick monks who needed medicines. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū kukkuccāyantā kulāni na payirupāsanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But being afraid of wrongdoing, the monks did not visit families. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, santaṁ bhikkhuṁ āpucchā kulāni payirupāsituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to visit families after taking leave of an available monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu nimantito sabhatto samāno santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā purebhattaṁ vā pacchābhattaṁ vā kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjeyya, aññatra samayā, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who has been invited to a meal visits families beforehand or afterwards without taking leave of an available monk, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyaṁ samayo. Cīvaradānasamayo, cīvarakārasamayo—ayaṁ tattha samayo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the appropriate occasions: it is the robe-giving season; it is a time of making robes.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantito nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Invited: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññatarena bhojanena nimantito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">invited to eat any of the five cooked foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabhatto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">To a meal: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena nimantito tena sabhatto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the invitation includes a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṁ nāma bhikkhuṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">An available monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkā hoti āpucchā pavisituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is able to take leave and then enter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asantaṁ nāma bhikkhuṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">No available monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti āpucchā pavisituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is not able to take leave and then enter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purebhattaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Beforehand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena nimantito taṁ abhuttāvī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he has not yet eaten what he has been invited to eat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchābhattaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Afterwards: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena nimantito taṁ antamaso kusaggenapi bhuttaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">even if he has just eaten what fits on the tip of a blade of grass from what he has been invited to eat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A family: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri kulāni— khattiyakulaṁ, brāhmaṇakulaṁ, vessakulaṁ, suddakulaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of families: the aristocratic family, the brahmin family, the merchant family, the worker family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Visits families: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa gharūpacāraṁ okkamantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he enters the vicinity of someone else’s house, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṁ pādaṁ ummāraṁ atikkāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he crosses the threshold with the first foot, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṁ pādaṁ atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he crosses the threshold with the second foot, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra samayāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except on an appropriate occasion: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā samayaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless it is an appropriate occasion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaradānasamayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is the robe-giving season: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthate kathine vassānassa pacchimo māso, atthate kathine pañca māsā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for one who has not participated in the robe-making procedure, it is the last month of the rainy season. For one who has participated in the robe-making procedure, it is the five-month period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvarakārasamayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a time of making robes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvare kayiramāne.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when he is making robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantite nimantitasaññī santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā purebhattaṁ vā pacchābhattaṁ vā kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjati, aññatra samayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has been invited, and he perceives that he has, and he visits families beforehand or afterwards without taking leave of an available monk, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantite vematiko santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā purebhattaṁ vā pacchābhattaṁ vā kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjati, aññatra samayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has been invited, but he is unsure of it, and he visits families beforehand or afterwards without taking leave of an available monk, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantite animantitasaññī santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā purebhattaṁ vā pacchābhattaṁ vā kulesu cārittaṁ āpajjati, aññatra samayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has been invited, but he does not perceive that he has, and he visits families beforehand or afterwards without taking leave of an available monk, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Animantite nimantitasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has not been invited, but he perceives that he has, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Animantite vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has not been invited, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Animantite animantitasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has not been invited, and he does not perceive that he has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is an appropriate occasion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṁ bhikkhuṁ āpucchā pavisati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he enters after taking leave of an available monk; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asantaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā pavisati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when there is no available monk, he enters without taking leave; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa gharena maggo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the road passes someone else’s house; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gharūpacārena maggo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the road passes the vicinity of someone else’s house; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antarārāmaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is going between monasteries; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunupassayaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is going to the dwelling place of nuns; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">titthiyaseyyaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is going to the dwelling place of the monastics of another religion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭikkamanaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is returning to the monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhattiyagharaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is going to the house where he has been invited; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cārittasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on visiting, the sixth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
