<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np9_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">9. Dutiyaupakkhaṭasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">9. The second training rule on what is set aside </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro puriso aññataraṁ purisaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain man said to another man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m giving a robe to Venerable Upananda.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sopi evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he replied, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahampi ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“So am I.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho aññataro piṇḍacāriko bhikkhu tesaṁ purisānaṁ imaṁ kathāsallāpaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An alms-collecting monk heard that conversation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu yenāyasmā upanando sakyaputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then went to Upananda the Sakyan and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahāpuññosi tvaṁ, āvuso upananda.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Upananda, you have much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amukasmiṁ okāse aññataro puriso aññataraṁ purisaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In such-and-such a place I heard two men telling each other </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that they’re each giving you a robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sopi evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahampi ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarena acchādessāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthāvuso, maṁ te upaṭṭhākā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They are my supporters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto yena te purisā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te purise etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Upananda then went to those men and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira maṁ tumhe, āvuso, cīvarehi acchādetukāmātthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true that you want to give me robes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Api nayya, evaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayyaṁ upanandaṁ cīvarehi acchādessāmā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s just what we were thinking.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace kho maṁ tumhe, āvuso, cīvarehi acchādetukāmāttha, evarūpena cīvarena acchādetha,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If that’s the case, then give me such-and-such a robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kyāhaṁ tehi acchannopi karissāmi, yānāhaṁ na paribhuñjissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For what’s the point of giving a robe that I won’t use?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te purisā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those men complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahicchā ime samaṇā sakyaputtiyā asantuṭṭhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These Sakyan monastics have great desires. They’re not content. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nayime sukarā cīvarehi acchādetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s no easy matter to give them robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma ayyo upanando amhehi pubbe appavārito upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could Venerable Upananda come to us and say what kind of robe he wants without first being invited?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ purisānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those men, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto pubbe appavārito gahapatike upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Upananda go to householders and say what kind of robe he wants without first being invited?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Upananda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, pubbe appavārito gahapatike upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ñātakā te, upananda, aññātakā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are they relatives of yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātakā, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātako, moghapurisa, aññātakānaṁ na jānāti patirūpaṁ vā appatirūpaṁ vā santaṁ vā asantaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, people who are unrelated don’t know what’s what’s appropriate and inappropriate, what’s good and bad, in dealing with each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, pubbe appavārito aññātake gahapatike upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And still you did this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhuṁ paneva uddissa ubhinnaṁ aññātakānaṁ gahapatīnaṁ vā gahapatānīnaṁ vā paccekacīvaracetāpannāni upakkhaṭāni honti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If two male or female householders have set aside separate robe funds for an unrelated monk, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imehi mayaṁ paccekacīvaracetāpannehi paccekacīvarāni cetāpetvā itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ cīvarehi acchādessāmā’ti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“With these separate robe funds we’ll buy separate robes and give them to monk so-and-so;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra ce so bhikkhu pubbe appavārito upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and if that monk, without first being invited, goes to them and specifies the kind of robe he wants, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhu vata maṁ āyasmanto imehi paccekacīvaracetāpannehi evarūpaṁ vā evarūpaṁ vā cīvaraṁ cetāpetvā acchādetha, ubhova santā ekenā’ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It would be good if you would put these separate robe funds together to buy such-and-such a robe and then give it to me,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇakamyataṁ upādāya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he does so because he wants something nice, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuṁ paneva uddissāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">For a monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhussatthāya, bhikkhuṁ ārammaṇaṁ karitvā, bhikkhuṁ acchādetukāmā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the benefit of a monk; making a monk the object of consideration, they want to give to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhinnanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvinnaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a pair. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātakā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unrelated: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātito vā pitito vā yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā asambaddhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who is not a descendant of one’s male ancestors going back seven generations, either on the mother’s side or on the father’s side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapatī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Male householders: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci agāraṁ ajjhāvasanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any men who live at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapatāniyo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Female householders: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci agāraṁ ajjhāvasanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any women who live at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaracetāpannāni nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Robe funds: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hiraññā vā suvaṇṇā vā muttā vā maṇī vā pavāḷā vā phalikā vā paṭakā vā suttā vā kappāsā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">money, gold, pearls, gems, corals, crystals, cloth, thread, or cotton wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi paccekacīvaracetāpannehīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With these separate robe funds: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccupaṭṭhitehi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">with that which is at their disposal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">We’ll buy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parivattetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having swapped. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchādessāmāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">We’ll give: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dassāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">we’ll donate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra ce so bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ bhikkhuṁ uddissa cīvaracetāpannāni upakkhaṭāni honti so bhikkhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk the robe funds have been set aside for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe appavāritoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without first being invited: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbe avutto hoti— “kīdisena te, bhante, cīvarena attho, kīdisaṁ te cīvaraṁ cetāpemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they have not said beforehand: “Venerable, what kind of robe do you need? What kind of robe can we buy for you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasaṅkamitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Goes to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gharaṁ gantvā yattha katthaci upasaṅkamitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having gone to their house or having gone wherever. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Specifies the kind of robe he wants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyataṁ vā hotu vitthataṁ vā appitaṁ vā saṇhaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">please make it long or wide or closely woven or soft. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi paccekacīvaracetāpannehīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">These separate robe funds: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccupaṭṭhitehi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that which is at their disposal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpaṁ vā evarūpaṁ vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such-and-such: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyataṁ vā vitthataṁ vā appitaṁ vā saṇhaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">long or wide or closely woven or soft. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To buy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parivattetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having swapped. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchādethāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Give: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dajjetha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">donate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhova santā ekenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Put together: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvepi janā ekena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">two people supplying him with one robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalyāṇakamyataṁ upādāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because he wants something nice: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sādhatthiko mahagghatthiko.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wanting something nice, wanting something expensive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vacanena āyataṁ vā vitthataṁ vā appitaṁ vā saṇhaṁ vā cetāpenti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If those householders buy a robe that is long, wide, closely woven, or soft because of his statement, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets the robe, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ pubbe appavārito aññātake gahapatike upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpannaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe, which I received after going to unrelated householders and saying what kind of robe I wanted without first being invited, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake aññātakasaññī pubbe appavārito gahapatike upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householders are unrelated and he perceives them as such, and, without first being invited, he goes to them and specifies the kind of robe he wants, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake vematiko pubbe appavārito gahapatike upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householders are unrelated, but he is unsure of it, and, without first being invited, he goes to them and specifies the kind of robe he wants, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake ñātakasaññī pubbe appavārito gahapatike upasaṅkamitvā cīvare vikappaṁ āpajjati, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householders are unrelated, but he perceives them as related, and, without first being invited, he goes to them and specifies the kind of robe he wants, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake aññātakasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householders are related, but he perceives them as unrelated, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householders are related, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake ñātakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the householders are related and he perceives them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of another; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of his own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahagghaṁ cetāpetukāmānaṁ appagghaṁ cetāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the householders wish to buy something expensive, but he has them buy something inexpensive; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaupakkhaṭasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule on what is set aside, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
