<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc53_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on drinking alcohol </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">53. Hasadhammasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">53. The training rule on playing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū aciravatiyā nadiyā udake kīḷanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of seventeen were playing in the water of the river Aciravatī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rājā pasenadi kosalo mallikāya deviyā saddhiṁ uparipāsādavaragato hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then, while King Pasenadi of Kosala was up in his best stilt house with queen Mallikā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho rājā pasenadi kosalo sattarasavaggiye bhikkhū aciravatiyā nadiyā udake kīḷante.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he saw the monks from the group of seventeen playing in the river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna mallikaṁ deviṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He said to queen Mallikā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ete te, mallike, arahanto udake kīḷantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mallikā, these perfected ones are playing in the water.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nissaṁsayaṁ kho, mahārāja, bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṁ apaññattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great King, no doubt the Buddha hasn’t laid down a rule. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te vā bhikkhū appakataññuno”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Either that, or these monks are ignorant.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rañño pasenadissa kosalassa etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">King Pasenadi thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kena nu kho ahaṁ upāyena bhagavato ca na āroceyyaṁ, bhagavā ca jāneyya ime bhikkhū udake kīḷitā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Buddha find out about these monks playing in the water without me telling him?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo sattarasavaggiye bhikkhū pakkosāpetvā mahantaṁ guḷapiṇḍaṁ adāsi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Having sent for those monks, King Pasenadi gave them a large lump of sugar, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ, bhante, guḷapiṇḍaṁ bhagavato dethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, please give this lump of sugar to the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū taṁ guḷapiṇḍaṁ ādāya yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks took the lump of sugar, went to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ, bhante, guḷapiṇḍaṁ rājā pasenadi kosalo bhagavato detī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Sir, this lump of sugar is a gift from King Pasenadi.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kahaṁ pana tumhe, bhikkhave, rājā addasā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But, monks, where did you see the king?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aciravatiyā nadiyā, bhagavā, udake kīḷante”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“From the river Aciravatī, while playing in the water.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, udake kīḷissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you play in water? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Udake hasadhamme pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk plays in water, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udake hasadhammo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Plays in water: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uparigopphake udake hasādhippāyo nimujjati vā ummujjati vā palavati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, aiming to have fun, he immerses himself or emerges on the surface or swims, in water that is more than ankle deep, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udake hasadhamme hasadhammasaññī, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is playing in water, and he perceives that he is, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udake hasadhamme vematiko, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is playing in water, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udake hasadhamme ahasadhammasaññī, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is playing in water, but he does not perceive that he is, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Heṭṭhāgopphake udake kīḷati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is playing in water less than ankle deep, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udake nāvāya kīḷati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is playing in a boat in water, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthena vā pādena vā kaṭṭhena vā kaṭhalāya vā udakaṁ paharati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he strikes the water with his hand, with his foot, with a stick, or with a stone, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhājanagataṁ udakaṁ vā kañjikaṁ vā khīraṁ vā takkaṁ vā rajanaṁ vā passāvaṁ vā cikkhallaṁ vā kīḷati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he plays with water in a vessel, or with conjee, milk, buttermilk, dye, urine, or mud in a vessel, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udake ahasadhamme hasadhammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not playing in water, but he perceives that he is, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udake ahasadhamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not playing in water, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udake ahasadhamme ahasadhammasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not playing in water, and he does not perceive that he is, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na hasādhippāyo,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not aiming to have fun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati karaṇīye udakaṁ otaritvā nimujjati vā ummujjati vā palavati vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when there is something to be done, he enters the water and then immerses himself or emerges on the surface or swims; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāraṁ gacchanto nimujjati vā ummujjati vā palavati vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, while crossing a body of water, he immerses himself or emerges on the surface or swims; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hasadhammasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on playing, the third, is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
