<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc19_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">19. Mahallakavihārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">19. The training rule on large dwellings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā kosambiyaṁ viharati ghositārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato channassa upaṭṭhāko mahāmatto āyasmato channassa vihāraṁ kārāpeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a government official who was Venerable Channa’s supporter was making him a dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā channo katapariyositaṁ vihāraṁ punappunaṁ chādāpeti, punappunaṁ lepāpeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the dwelling was finished, Channa had it roofed and plastered over and over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atibhārito vihāro paripati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Being overloaded, the dwelling collapsed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā channo tiṇañca kaṭṭhañca saṅkaḍḍhanto aññatarassa brāhmaṇassa yavakhettaṁ dūsesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, while collecting grass and sticks, Channa spoiled the barley field belonging to a certain brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That brahmin complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhadantā amhākaṁ yavakhettaṁ dūsessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the venerables spoil my barley field?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa brāhmaṇassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized Channa, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā channo katapariyositaṁ vihāraṁ punappunaṁ chādāpessati, punappunaṁ lepāpessati, atibhārito vihāro paripatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Channa have a finished dwelling roofed and plastered over and over, so that it collapsed from overloading?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ channaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Channa: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, channa, katapariyositaṁ vihāraṁ punappunaṁ chādāpesi, punappunaṁ lepāpesi, atibhārito vihāro paripatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Channa, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, katapariyositaṁ vihāraṁ punappunaṁ chādāpessasi, punappunaṁ lepāpessasi, atibhārito vihāro paripati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mahallakaṁ pana bhikkhunā vihāraṁ kārayamānena yāva dvārakosā aggaḷaṭṭhapanāya ālokasandhiparikammāya dvatticchadanassa pariyāyaṁ appaharite ṭhitena adhiṭṭhātabbaṁ. Tato ce uttari appaharitepi ṭhito adhiṭṭhaheyya pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When a monk is building a large dwelling, then standing where there are no cultivated plants, he may apply two or three courses of roofing material, taking it as far as the doorcase and using it for fixing the door and for treating the window openings. If he applies more than that, even if he stands where there are no cultivated plants, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahallako nāma vihāro</span></p>
<p class="p3">A large dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sassāmiko vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one with an owner is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ullitto vā hoti avalitto vā ullittāvalitto vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">plastered inside or plastered outside or plastered both inside and outside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārayamānenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is building: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karonto vā kārāpento vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">building it himself or having it built. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva dvārakosāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">As far as the doorcase: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">piṭṭhasaṅghāṭassa samantā hatthapāsā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a distance of an arm’s reach next to the door frame. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggaḷaṭṭhapanāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">For fixing the door: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvāraṭṭhapanāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the fixing of the door. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ālokasandhiparikammāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">For treating the window openings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vātapānaparikammāya setavaṇṇaṁ kāḷavaṇṇaṁ gerukaparikammaṁ mālākammaṁ latākammaṁ makaradantakaṁ pañcapaṭikaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for treating the window openings there is white color, black color, and treating with red ocher; and there is making a garland pattern, a creeper pattern, a shark-teeth pattern, and the fivefold pattern. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvatticchadanassa pariyāyaṁ appaharite ṭhitena adhiṭṭhātabbanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Standing where there are no cultivated plants, he may apply two or three courses of roofing material: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">haritaṁ nāma pubbaṇṇaṁ aparaṇṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">cultivated plants: grain and vegetables; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace harite ṭhito adhiṭṭhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he applies it while standing where there are cultivated plants, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maggena chādentassa dve magge adhiṭṭhahitvā tatiyaṁ maggaṁ āṇāpetvā pakkamitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone covering in lines, after covering with two layers, he may ask for a third layer, and he should then leave. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariyāyena chādentassa dve pariyāye adhiṭṭhahitvā tatiyaṁ pariyāyaṁ āṇāpetvā pakkamitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone covering in circles, after covering with two layers, he may ask for a third layer, and he should then leave. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari appaharitepi ṭhito adhiṭṭhaheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he applies more than that, even if he stands where there are no cultivated plants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iṭṭhakāya chādentassa iṭṭhakiṭṭhakāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is covering with bricks, then for every brick, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Silāya chādentassa silāya silāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is covering with slate, then for every piece of slate, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sudhāya chādentassa piṇḍe piṇḍe āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is covering with plaster, then for every lump, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiṇena chādentassa karaḷe karaḷe āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is covering with grass, then for every handful, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṇṇena chādentassa paṇṇe paṇṇe āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is covering with leaves, then for every leaf, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekadvattipariyāye atirekasaññī adhiṭṭhāti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than two or three courses, and he perceives it as more, and he applies it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekadvattipariyāye vematiko adhiṭṭhāti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than two or three courses, but he is unsure of it, and he applies it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekadvattipariyāye ūnakasaññī adhiṭṭhāti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than two or three courses, but he perceives it as less, and he applies it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakadvattipariyāye atirekasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than two or three courses, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakadvattipariyāye vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than two or three courses, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakadvattipariyāye ūnakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than two or three courses, and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvattipariyāye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he applies two or three courses; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakadvattipariyāye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he applies less than two or three courses; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">leṇe,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a shelter; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">guhāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a cave; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇakuṭikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a grass hut; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of his own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsāgāraṁ ṭhapetvā sabbattha anāpatti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is anything apart from a dwelling; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahallakavihārasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on large dwellings, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
