<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc42_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on naked ascetics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">42. Uyyojanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">42. The training rule on sending away </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto bhātuno saddhivihārikaṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Upananda the Sakyan said to his brother’s student, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehāvuso, gāmaṁ piṇḍāya pavisissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, let’s go to the village for alms.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa adāpetvā uyyojesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, without getting him any food, he sent him away, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gacchāvuso, na me tayā saddhiṁ kathā vā nisajjā vā phāsu hoti, ekakassa me kathā vā nisajjā vā phāsu hotī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Go away! I’m not comfortable talking or sitting with you, but only if I talk and sit by myself.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu upakaṭṭhe kāle nāsakkhi piṇḍāya carituṁ, paṭikkamanepi bhattavissaggaṁ na sambhāvesi, chinnabhatto ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But since the right time for eating was coming to an end, he was unable to walk for alms. And as he returned to the monastery, there was nobody offering food, and so he missed his meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu ārāmaṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then went to the monastery and told the monks what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto bhikkhuṁ—‘ehāvuso, gāmaṁ piṇḍāya pavisissāmā’ti tassa adāpetvā uyyojessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Upananda say to a monk, ‘Come, let’s go to the village for alms,’ and then send him away without getting him any food?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, bhikkhuṁ—‘ehāvuso, gāmaṁ piṇḍāya pavisissāmā’ti tassa adāpetvā uyyojesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, bhikkhuṁ—“ehāvuso, gāmaṁ piṇḍāya pavisissāmā”ti tassa adāpetvā uyyojessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuṁ—‘ehāvuso, gāmaṁ vā nigamaṁ vā piṇḍāya pavisissāmā’ti tassa dāpetvā vā adāpetvā vā uyyojeyya— ‘gacchāvuso, na me tayā saddhiṁ kathā vā nisajjā vā phāsu hoti, ekakassa me kathā vā nisajjā vā phāsu hotī’ti, etadeva paccayaṁ karitvā anaññaṁ, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk says to a monk, “Come, let’s go to the village or town for alms,” and then, whether he has had food given to him or not, sends him away, saying, “Go away, I’m not comfortable talking or sitting with you, but only if I talk and sit by myself,” and he does so only for this reason and no other, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo, yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To a monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to another monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ehāvuso, gāmaṁ vā nigamaṁ vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Come … to the village or town: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāmopi nigamopi nagarampi, gāmo ceva nigamo ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a village, also a town, also a city; both a village and a town. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa dāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He has had food given to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāguṁ vā bhattaṁ vā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā dāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he has had rice porridge, a meal, fresh food, or cooked food given to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kiñci dāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he has not had anything given to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyojeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sends away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātugāmena saddhiṁ hasitukāmo kīḷitukāmo raho nisīditukāmo anācāraṁ ācaritukāmo evaṁ vadeti— “gacchāvuso, na me tayā saddhiṁ kathā vā nisajjā vā phāsu hoti, ekakassa me kathā vā nisajjā vā phāsu hotī”ti uyyojeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, wanting to laugh with a woman, wanting to enjoy himself with her, wanting to sit down in private with her, wanting to misbehave with her, he says, “Go away! I’m not comfortable talking or sitting with you, but only if I talk and sit by myself,” and he sends him away, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vā savanūpacāraṁ vā vijahantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk is in the process of going beyond the range of sight or the range of hearing, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijahite, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the other monk has gone beyond, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadeva paccayaṁ karitvā anaññanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He does so only for this reason and no other: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na añño koci paccayo hoti uyyojetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is no other reason for sending him away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī uyyojeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk is fully ordained, and he perceives him as such, and he sends him away, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko uyyojeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he sends him away, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī uyyojeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk is fully ordained, but he does not perceive him as such, and he sends him away, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalisāsanaṁ āropeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he puts him down, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ uyyojeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he sends away one who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalisāsanaṁ āropeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he puts him down, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ubho ekato na yāpessāmā”ti uyyojeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sends him away, thinking, “Together we won’t get enough;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahagghaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ passitvā lobhadhammaṁ uppādessatī”ti uyyojeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sends him away, thinking, “If he sees these valuable goods, he’ll become greedy;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mātugāmaṁ passitvā anabhiratiṁ uppādessatī”ti uyyojeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sends him away, thinking, “If he sees this woman, he’ll become lustful;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gilānassa vā ohiyyakassa vā vihārapālassa vā yāguṁ vā bhattaṁ vā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā nīharā”ti uyyojeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sends him away, saying, “Take rice porridge or a meal or fresh food or cooked food to the one who is sick or to the one who is left behind or to the one who is guarding the dwellings;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na anācāraṁ ācaritukāmo,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not want to misbehave; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati karaṇīye uyyojeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sends him away when there is something to be done; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyojanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on sending away, the second, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
