<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk67_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pādukavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on shoes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">67. Oguṇṭhitasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">67. The training rule on covered heads </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū oguṇṭhitasīsassa dhammaṁ desenti …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six gave teachings to people with covered heads. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na oguṇṭhitasīsassa agilānassa dhammaṁ desessāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘I will not give a teaching to anyone with a covered head who is not sick,’ this is how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Oguṇṭhitasīso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">With a covered head: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sasīsaṁ pāruto vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the upper robe also covers the head is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na oguṇṭhitasīsassa agilānassa dhammo desetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should not give a teaching to anyone with a covered head who is not sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca oguṇṭhitasīsassa agilānassa dhammaṁ deseti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk, out of disrespect, gives a teaching to someone with a covered head who is not sick, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīsaṁ vivarāpetvā deseti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he teaches the person after having them uncover their head; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
