<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc24_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">24. Āmisasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">24. The training rule on worldly gain </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadantā lābhino honti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the senior monks who were instructing the nuns received robes, almsfood, dwellings, and medicines. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū evaṁ vadanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the monks from the group of six said this about them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na bahukatā therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadituṁ; āmisahetu therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The senior monks aren’t instructing the nuns as a service, but for the sake of worldly gain.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū evaṁ vakkhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na bahukatā therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadituṁ; āmisahetu therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadantī’”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the senior monks aren’t instructing the nuns to render a service, but for the sake of worldly gain?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, evaṁ vadetha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you say this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na bahukatā therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadituṁ; āmisahetu therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadantī’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, evaṁ vakkhatha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you say this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na bahukatā therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadituṁ; āmisahetu therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadantī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu evaṁ vadeyya—‘āmisahetu therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovandantī’ti, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk says that the senior monks are instructing the nuns for the sake of worldly gain, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisahetūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the sake of worldly gain: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvarahetu piṇḍapātahetu senāsanahetu gilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārahetu sakkārahetu garukārahetu mānanahetu vandanahetu pūjanahetu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the sake of robes, for the sake of almsfood, for the sake of a dwelling, for the sake of medicines, for the sake of honor, for the sake of respect, for the sake of deference, for the sake of veneration, for the sake of worship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vadeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannaṁ saṅghena sammataṁ bhikkhunovādakaṁ avaṇṇaṁ kattukāmo ayasaṁ kattukāmo maṅkukattukāmo evaṁ vadeti— “cīvarahetu piṇḍapātahetu senāsanahetu gilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārahetu sakkārahetu garukārahetu mānanahetu vandanahetu pūjanahetu ovadatī”ti bhaṇati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, concerning one who is fully ordained and who has been appointed by the Sangha as an instructor of nuns—desiring to disparage him, desiring to give him a bad reputation, desiring to humiliate him—he says, “He instructs for the sake of robes,” “… for the sake of almsfood,” “… for the sake of a dwelling,” “… for the sake of medicines,” “… for the sake of honor,” “… for the sake of respect,” “… for the sake of deference,” “… for the sake of veneration,” “… for the sake of worship,” he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī evaṁ vadeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, and he says such a thing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko evaṁ vadeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, and he says such a thing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī evaṁ vadeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as illegitimate, and he says such a thing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannaṁ saṅghena asammataṁ bhikkhunovādakaṁ avaṇṇaṁ kattukāmo ayasaṁ kattukāmo maṅkukattukāmo evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone who is fully ordained is an instructor of nuns, but he has not been appointed by the Sangha as such, and a monk—desiring to disparage him, desiring to give him a bad reputation, desiring to humiliate him—says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“cīvarahetu …pe… pūjanahetu ovadatī”ti bhaṇati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“He instructs for the sake of robes,” “… for the sake of almsfood,” “… for the sake of a dwelling,” “… for the sake of medicines,” “… for the sake of honor,” “… for the sake of respect,” “… for the sake of deference,” “… for the sake of veneration,” “… for the sake of worship,” he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ saṅghena sammataṁ vā asammataṁ vā bhikkhunovādakaṁ avaṇṇaṁ kattukāmo ayasaṁ kattukāmo maṅkukattukāmo evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone who is not fully ordained is an instructor of nuns, whether or not he has been appointed by the Sangha as such, and a monk—desiring to disparage him, desiring to give him a bad reputation, desiring to humiliate him—says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“cīvarahetu piṇḍapātahetu senāsanahetu gilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārahetu sakkārahetu garukārahetu mānanahetu vandanahetu pūjanahetu ovadatī”ti bhaṇati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“He instructs for the sake of robes,” “… for the sake of almsfood,” “… for the sake of a dwelling,” “… for the sake of medicines,” “… for the sake of honor,” “… for the sake of respect,” “… for the sake of deference,” “… for the sake of veneration,” “… for the sake of worship,” he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as legitimate, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pakatiyā cīvarahetu piṇḍapātahetu senāsanahetu gilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārahetu sakkārahetu garukārahetu mānanahetu vandanahetu pūjanahetu ovadantaṁ bhaṇati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">if he says it to one who regularly gives the instruction for the sake of robes, … for the sake of almsfood, … for the sake of a dwelling, … for the sake of medicines, … for the sake of honor, … for the sake of respect, … for the sake of deference, … for the sake of veneration, … for the sake of worship; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on worldly gain, the fourth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
