<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc20_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">20. Sappāṇakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">20. The training rule on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā āḷaviyaṁ viharati aggāḷave cetiye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Āḷavī at the Aggāḷava Shrine, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āḷavakā bhikkhū navakammaṁ karontā jānaṁ sappāṇakaṁ udakaṁ tiṇampi mattikampi siñcantipi siñcāpentipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks there were doing building work. They poured water that they knew contained living beings onto grass and clay, and they had others do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āḷavakā bhikkhū jānaṁ sappāṇakaṁ udakaṁ tiṇampi mattikampi siñcissantipi siñcāpessantipī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks at Āḷavī pour water that they know contains living beings onto grass and clay, and have others do the same?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āḷavake bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, jānaṁ sappāṇakaṁ udakaṁ tiṇampi mattikampi siñcathapi siñcāpethapī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, jānaṁ sappāṇakaṁ udakaṁ tiṇampi mattikampi siñcissathapi siñcāpessathapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ sappāṇakaṁ udakaṁ tiṇaṁ vā mattikaṁ vā siñceyya vā siñcāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk pours water that he knows contains living beings onto grass or clay, or has it poured, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">…The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti. Aññe vā tassa ārocenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siñceyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pours: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ siñcati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he pours it himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siñcāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has poured: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks another, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇatto bahukampi siñcati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he only asks once, then even if the other pours a lot, he commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇake sappāṇakasaññī tiṇaṁ vā mattikaṁ vā siñcati vā siñcāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it contains living beings, and he perceives it as such, and he pours it onto grass or clay, or he has it poured, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇake vematiko tiṇaṁ vā mattikaṁ vā siñcati vā siñcāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it contains living beings, but he is unsure of it, and he pours it onto grass or clay, or he has it poured, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇake appāṇakasaññī tiṇaṁ vā mattikaṁ vā siñcati vā siñcāpeti vā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it contains living beings, but he does not perceive it as such, and he pours it onto grass or clay, or he has it poured, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appāṇake sappāṇakasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it does not contain living beings, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appāṇake vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it does not contain living beings, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appāṇake appāṇakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it does not contain living beings, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on containing living beings, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavaggo dutiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second sub-chapter on plants is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtaṁ aññāya ujjhāyaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Plant, with evasion, complaining, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pakkamantena te duve;</span></p>
<p class="p3">the two with departing; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe nikkaḍḍhanāhacca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Before, throwing out, removable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvāraṁ sappāṇakena cāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Door, and containing living beings.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
