<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc51_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on drinking alcohol </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">51. Surāpānasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">51. The training rule on drinking alcoholic drinks </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā cetiyesu cārikaṁ caramāno yena bhaddavatikā tena pāyāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the Buddha was wandering in the country of Ceti on his way to Bhaddavatikā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasaṁsu kho gopālakā pasupālakā kassakā pathāvino bhagavantaṁ dūratova āgacchantaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he was seen by a number of cow-herds, shepherds, farmers, and travelers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ—“mā kho, bhante, bhagavā ambatitthaṁ agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They said to him, “Venerable Sir, don’t go to Ambatittha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ambatitthe, bhante, jaṭilassa assame nāgo paṭivasati iddhimā āsiviso ghoraviso.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a highly venomous dragon with supernormal powers there, in the hermitage of a dreadlocked ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhagavantaṁ mā viheṭhesī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t let it harm you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vutte, bhagavā tuṇhī ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha was silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They repeated their request a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho gopālakā pasupālakā kassakā pathāvino bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mā kho, bhante, bhagavā ambatitthaṁ agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ambatitthe, bhante, jaṭilassa assame nāgo paṭivasati iddhimā āsiviso ghoraviso.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhagavantaṁ mā viheṭhesī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho bhagavā tuṇhī ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the Buddha remained silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā anupubbena cārikaṁ caramāno yena bhaddavatikā tadavasari. Tatra sudaṁ bhagavā bhaddavatikāyaṁ viharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha then continued on to Bhaddavatikā, and he stayed there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāgato yena ambatitthassa jaṭilassa assamo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā agyāgāraṁ pavisitvā tiṇasanthārakaṁ paññapetvā nisīdi pallaṅkaṁ ābhujitvā ujuṁ kāyaṁ paṇidhāya parimukhaṁ satiṁ upaṭṭhapetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then Venerable Sāgata went to the hermitage of that dreadlocked ascetic and entered his fire hut. After putting out a straw mat, he sat down, crossed his legs, straightened his body, and established mindfulness in front of him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho so nāgo āyasmantaṁ sāgataṁ paviṭṭhaṁ. Disvāna dummano padhūpāyi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing that Sāgata had entered the fire hut, the dragon was upset and emitted smoke. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmāpi sāgato padhūpāyi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāgata, too, emitted smoke. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so nāgo makkhaṁ asahamāno pajjali.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The dragon was not able to contain his rage and emitted flames. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmāpi sāgato tejodhātuṁ samāpajjitvā pajjali.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāgata entered the fire element and he, too, emitted flames. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāgato tassa nāgassa tejasā tejaṁ pariyādiyitvā yena bhaddavatikā tenupasaṅkami.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after conquering fire with fire, Sāgata went to Bhaddavatikā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bhaddavatikāyaṁ yathābhirantaṁ viharitvā yena kosambī tena cārikaṁ pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After staying at Bhaddavatikā for as long as he liked, the Buddha set out wandering toward Kosambī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho kosambikā upāsakā—“ayyo kira sāgato ambatitthikena nāgena saddhiṁ saṅgāmesī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā anupubbena cārikaṁ caramāno yena kosambī tadavasari. Atha kho kosambikā upāsakā bhagavato paccuggamanaṁ karitvā yenāyasmā sāgato tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he arrived, the lay followers there received him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ sāgataṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ aṭṭhaṁsu. Ekamantaṁ ṭhitā kho kosambikā upāsakā āyasmantaṁ sāgataṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the lay followers at Kosambī had heard about Sāgata fighting the Ambatittha dragon. And so after receiving the Buddha, they went to see Sāgata. They bowed, stood to one side, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ, bhante, ayyānaṁ dullabhañca manāpañca, kiṁ paṭiyādemā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, what can we prepare for you that’s delicious but hard to get?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vutte, chabbaggiyā bhikkhū kosambike upāsake etadavocuṁ—“atthāvuso, kāpotikā nāma pasannā bhikkhūnaṁ dullabhā ca manāpā ca, taṁ paṭiyādethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six replied, “There’s a delicious liquor called Kāpotikā, which is hard for the monks to get. Prepare that.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kosambikā upāsakā ghare ghare kāpotikaṁ pasannaṁ paṭiyādetvā āyasmantaṁ sāgataṁ piṇḍāya paviṭṭhaṁ disvāna āyasmantaṁ sāgataṁ etadavocuṁ—“pivatu, bhante, ayyo sāgato kāpotikaṁ pasannaṁ, pivatu, bhante, ayyo sāgato kāpotikaṁ pasannan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the lay followers prepared Kāpotikā in house after house. Then, when they saw that Sāgata had entered the town for alms, they said to him, “Drink, Venerable, drink the Kāpotikā liquor.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāgato ghare ghare kāpotikaṁ pasannaṁ pivitvā nagaramhā nikkhamanto nagaradvāre paripati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāgata drank that liquor in house after house, and as he was leaving town, he collapsed at the town gate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sambahulehi bhikkhūhi saddhiṁ nagaramhā nikkhamanto addasa āyasmantaṁ sāgataṁ nagaradvāre paripatantaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the Buddha, together with a number of monks, was also leaving town, and he saw Sāgata at the town gate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi—“gaṇhatha, bhikkhave, sāgatan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He said, “Monks, pick up Sāgata.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paṭissuṇitvā āyasmantaṁ sāgataṁ ārāmaṁ netvā yena bhagavā tena sīsaṁ katvā nipātesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “Yes, Sir,” they led him to the monastery, where they put him down with his head toward the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāgato parivattitvā yena bhagavā tena pāde karitvā seyyaṁ kappesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But Sāgata turned around, pointing his feet toward the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi—“nanu, bhikkhave, pubbe sāgato tathāgate sagāravo ahosi sappatisso”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said, “Previously, monks, wasn’t Sāgata respectful and deferential toward me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ, bhante”.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Api nu kho, bhikkhave, sāgato etarahi tathāgate sagāravo sappatisso”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But is he now?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṁ, bhante”.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Certainly not.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu, bhikkhave, sāgato ambatitthikena nāgena saddhiṁ saṅgāmesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just recently, didn’t Sāgata fight the Ambatittha dragon?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ, bhante”.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Api nu kho, bhikkhave, sāgato etarahi pahoti nāgena saddhiṁ saṅgāmetun”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Would he now be able to fight a dragon?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṁ, bhante”.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Certainly not.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Api nu kho, bhikkhave, taṁ pātabbaṁ yaṁ pivitvā visaññī assā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, monks, should one drink that which makes one senseless?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṁ, bhante”.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Certainly not, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ananucchavikaṁ, bhikkhave, sāgatassa ananulomikaṁ appatirūpaṁ assāmaṇakaṁ akappiyaṁ akaraṇīyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s not suitable, monks, it’s not proper for Sāgata, it’s not worthy of a monastic, it’s not allowable, it’s not to be done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, sāgato majjaṁ pivissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could Sāgata drink alcoholic drinks? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Surāmerayapāne pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk drinks this or that kind of alcoholic drink, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">This kind of alcoholic drink: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">piṭṭhasurā pūvasurā odanasurā kiṇṇapakkhittā sambhārasaṁyuttā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">alcoholic drinks made from flour, alcoholic drinks made from pastries, alcoholics drink made from rice, those with yeast added, those made from a combination of ingredients. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Merayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">That kind of alcoholic drink: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pupphāsavo phalāsavo madhvāsavo guḷāsavo sambhārasaṁyutto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">alcoholic drinks made from flowers, alcoholic drinks made from fruit, alcoholic drinks made from honey, alcoholic drinks made from sugar, those made from a combination of ingredients. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piveyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Drinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antamaso kusaggenapi pivati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he drinks even what fits on the tip of a blade of grass, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majje majjasaññī pivati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an alcoholic drink, and he perceives it as such, and he drinks it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majje vematiko pivati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an alcoholic drink, but he is unsure of it, and he drinks it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majje amajjasaññī pivati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an alcoholic drink, but he perceives it as non-alcoholic, and he drinks it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amajje majjasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a non-alcoholic drink, but he perceives it as alcoholic, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amajje vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a non-alcoholic drink, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amajje amajjasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a non-alcoholic drink, and he perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amajjañca hoti majjavaṇṇaṁ majjagandhaṁ majjarasaṁ taṁ pivati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he drinks a non-alcoholic drink that has the color, smell, or taste of an alcoholic drink; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sūpasampāke,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is cooked in a bean curry; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maṁsasampāke,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is cooked with meat; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">telasampāke,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is cooked with oil; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmalakaphāṇite,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is in syrup from emblic myrobalan; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amajjaṁ ariṭṭhaṁ pivati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he drinks a drink that is normally alcoholic, but which is actually without alcohol; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on drinking alcoholic drinks, the first, is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
