<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc80_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">80. Chandaṁadatvāgamanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">80. The training rule on leaving without giving consent </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena saṅgho sannipatito hoti kenacideva karaṇīyena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha had gathered on some business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū cīvarakammaṁ karontā ekassa chandaṁ adaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six were busy making robes and so they gave their consent to one among them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho saṅgho “yassatthāya sannipatito taṁ kammaṁ karissāmī”ti ñattiṁ ṭhapesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Sangha was ready to do the legal procedure for which it had gathered, it put forward a motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk from the group of six thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“evamevime ekamekassa kammaṁ karonti, kassa tumhe kammaṁ karissathā”ti chandaṁ adatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is just how they do legal procedures against us one by one, but against who will you do this one?” and without giving his consent, he got up from his seat and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu saṅghe vinicchayakathāya vattamānāya chandaṁ adatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When the Sangha is in the process of deliberating, how could that monk get up from his seat and leave without giving his consent?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, saṅghe vinicchayakathāya vattamānāya chandaṁ adatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, saṅghe vinicchayakathāya vattamānāya chandaṁ adatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu saṅghe vinicchayakathāya vattamānāya chandaṁ adatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkameyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When the Sangha is in the process of deliberating, if a monk gets up from his seat and leaves without first giving his consent, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe vinicchayakathā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Sangha is deliberating: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vatthu vā ārocitaṁ hoti avinicchitaṁ, ñatti vā ṭhapitā hoti, kammavācā vā vippakatā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the topic has been announced but the deliberation is not yet concluded, or when the motion has been put forward, or when the announcement is still under way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandaṁ adatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkameyyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gets up from his seat and leaves without first giving his consent: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṁ idaṁ kammaṁ kuppaṁ assa vaggaṁ assa na kareyyā”ti gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he leaves, thinking, “How may this legal procedure be disturbed?” or “How may this legal procedure be done by an incomplete assembly?” or “How may this legal procedure not be done?” then he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisāya hatthapāsaṁ vijahantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is in the process of going beyond arm’s reach of the gathering, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijahite āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he has gone beyond arm’s reach, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī chandaṁ adatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, and he gets up from his seat and leaves without first giving his consent, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko chandaṁ adatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, and he gets up from his seat and leaves without first giving his consent, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī chandaṁ adatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamati, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as illegitimate, and he gets up from his seat and leaves without first giving his consent, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as legitimate, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅghassa bhaṇḍanaṁ vā kalaho vā viggaho vā vivādo vā bhavissatī”ti gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he leaves because he thinks there will be quarrels or disputes in the Sangha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅghabhedo vā saṅgharāji vā bhavissatī”ti gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he leaves because he thinks there will be a fracture or schism in the Sangha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“adhammena vā vaggena vā na kammārahassa vā kammaṁ karissatī”ti gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he leaves because he thinks the legal procedure will be illegitimate, done by an incomplete assembly, or done against one who does not deserve it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilāno gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he leaves because he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa karaṇīyena gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he leaves because he has to take care of someone who is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uccārena vā passāvena vā pīḷito gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he leaves because he needs to relieve himself; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kammaṁ kopetukāmo puna paccāgamissāmī”ti gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he leaves with the intention to return, and not because he wants to invalidate the legal procedure; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandaṁ adatvā gamanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on leaving without giving consent, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
