<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc49_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on naked ascetics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">49. Senāvāsasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">49. The training rule on staying with armies </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sati karaṇīye senaṁ gantvā atirekatirattaṁ senāya vasanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six went to the army on some business, and they stayed there for more than three nights. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā senāya vasissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics stay with the army? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākampi alābhā, amhākampi dulladdhaṁ, ye mayaṁ ājīvassa hetu puttadārassa kāraṇā senāya paṭivasāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s our misfortune that we must stay with the army for the sake of our livelihood and because of our wives and children.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū atirekatirattaṁ senāya vasissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six stay with the army for more than three nights?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, atirekatirattaṁ senāya vasathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, atirekatirattaṁ senāya vasissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā ca tassa bhikkhuno kocideva paccayo senaṁ gamanāya, dirattatirattaṁ tena bhikkhunā senāya vasitabbaṁ. Tato ce uttari vaseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If that monk has a reason for going to the army, he may stay with the army for two or three nights. If he stays longer than that, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siyā ca tassa bhikkhuno kocideva paccayo senaṁ gamanāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that monk has a reason for going to the army: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā paccayo siyā karaṇīyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has a reason, if he has something to  do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dirattatirattaṁ tena bhikkhunā senāya vasitabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He may stay with the army for two or three nights: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvetisso rattiyo vasitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he may stay for two or for three nights. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari vaseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stays longer than that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthe divase atthaṅgate sūriye senāya vasati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is staying with the army at sunset on the fourth day, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekatiratte atirekasaññī senāya vasati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than three nights, and he perceives it as more, and he is staying with the army, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekatiratte vematiko senāya vasati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than three nights, but he is unsure of it, and he is staying with the army, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekatiratte ūnakasaññī senāya vasati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than three nights, but he perceives it as less, and he is staying with the army, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakatiratte atirekasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than three nights, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakatiratte vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than three nights, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakatiratte ūnakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than three nights, and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvetisso rattiyo vasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stays for two or three nights; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakadvetisso rattiyo vasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stays for less than two or three nights; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve rattiyo vasitvā tatiyāya rattiyā purāruṇā nikkhamitvā puna vasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stays for two nights, then leaves before dawn on the third night, and then stays again; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilāno vasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stays because he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa karaṇīyena vasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stays because he has to take care of someone who is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">senā vā paṭisenāya ruddhā hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the army is obstructed by an enemy army; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kenaci palibuddho hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is obstructed from leaving; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Senāvāsasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on staying with armies, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
