<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc66_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">66. Theyyasatthasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">66. The training rule on a group of traveling thieves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro sattho rājagahā paṭiyālokaṁ gantukāmo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain group of travelers was about to go south from Rājagaha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu te manusse etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk said to those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahampāyasmantehi saddhiṁ gamissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Let me travel with you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayaṁ kho, bhante, suṅkaṁ pariharissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But we’re smuggling goods.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pajānāthāvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s your business.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho kammiyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The customs officers heard </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sattho kira suṅkaṁ pariharissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">about that group of travelers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te magge pariyuṭṭhiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then blocked the road, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te kammiyā taṁ satthaṁ gahetvā acchinditvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">caught the group, confiscated the goods, and asked that monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, bhante, jānaṁ theyyasatthena saddhiṁ gacchasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, why are you knowingly traveling with a group of thieves?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Palibundhetvā muñciṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they detained him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After being released, that monk went to Sāvatthī, where he told the monks what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu jānaṁ theyyasatthena saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a monk knowingly travel by appointment with a group of thieves?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, jānaṁ theyyasatthena saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, jānaṁ theyyasatthena saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ theyyasatthena saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjeyya, antamaso gāmantarampi, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk knowingly travels by appointment with a group of thieves, even just to the next village, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowingly: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti, aññe vā tassa ārocenti, so vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the group of travelers has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Theyyasattho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A group of thieves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">corā katakammā vā honti akatakammā vā, rājānaṁ vā theyyaṁ gacchanti suṅkaṁ vā pariharanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">thieves who have done their deed or thieves who have not. They are stealing from the king or smuggling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidhāyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">By appointment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gacchāmāvuso, gacchāma, bhante; gacchāma, bhante, gacchāmāvuso, ajja vā hiyyo vā pare vā gacchāmā”ti saṁvidahati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes an appointment like this: the monk says, “Let’s go,” and they reply, “Yes, let’s go, Venerable;” or they say, “Let’s go, Venerable,” and the monk replies, “Yes, let’s go;” or the monk says, “Let’s go today,” “Let’s go tomorrow,” or “Let’s go the day after tomorrow,” then he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antamaso gāmantarampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even just to the next village: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuṭasampāte gāme gāmantare gāmantare āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the villages are a chicken’s flight apart, then for every next village he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agāmake araññe addhayojane addhayojane āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it is an uninhabited area, a wilderness, then for every six kilometers he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Theyyasatthe theyyasatthasaññī saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a group of traveling thieves, and he perceives it as such, and he travels by appointment with them, even just to the next village, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Theyyasatthe vematiko saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a group of traveling thieves, but he is unsure of it, and he travels by appointment with them, even just to the next village, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Theyyasatthe atheyyasatthasaññī saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a group of traveling thieves, but he does not perceive it as such, and he travels by appointment with them, even just to the next village, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu saṁvidahati, manussā na saṁvidahanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk makes an appointment, but the group does not express its agreement, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atheyyasatthe theyyasatthasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a group of traveling thieves, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atheyyasatthe vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a group of traveling thieves, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atheyyasatthe atheyyasatthasaññī anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a group of traveling thieves, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṁvidahitvā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes, but not by appointment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussā saṁvidahanti bhikkhu na saṁvidahati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the group has made an appointment, but he has not expressed his agreement; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">visaṅketena gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes, but not according to the appointment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Theyyasatthasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on a group of traveling thieves, the sixth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
