<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc37_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on eating </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">37. Vikālabhojanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">37. The training rule on eating at the wrong time </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rājagahe giraggasamajjo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time in Rājagaha there was a hilltop fair, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū giraggasamajjaṁ dassanāya agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">which the monks from the group of seventeen went to see. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā sattarasavaggiye bhikkhū passitvā nahāpetvā vilimpetvā bhojetvā khādanīyaṁ adaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people saw the monks, they bathed them, anointed them, fed them cooked food, and gave them fresh food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū khādanīyaṁ ādāya ārāmaṁ gantvā chabbaggiye bhikkhū etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They brought that fresh food back to the monastery and said to the monks from the group of six, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gaṇhāthāvuso, khādanīyaṁ khādathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Help yourselves!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kuto tumhehi, āvuso, khādanīyaṁ laddhan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But where did you get this food?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ pana tumhe, āvuso, vikāle bhojanaṁ bhuñjathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, do you eat at the wrong time?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū vikāle bhojanaṁ bhuñjissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those monks from the group of seventeen eat at the wrong time?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū vikāle bhojanaṁ bhuñjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of seventeen eat at the wrong time?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, vikāle bhojanaṁ bhuñjathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, vikāle bhojanaṁ bhuñjissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu vikāle khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats fresh or cooked food at the wrong time, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikālo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the wrong time: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhanhike vītivatte yāva aruṇuggamanā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the middle of the day has passed, until dawn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, the post-midday tonics, the seven-day tonics, and the lifetime tonics—the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives fresh or cooked food with the intention of eating it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikāle vikālasaññī khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the wrong time, and he perceives it as such, and he eats fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikāle vematiko khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the wrong time, but he is unsure of it, and he eats fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikāle kālasaññī khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the wrong time, but he perceives it as the right time, and he eats fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ āhāratthāya paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics for the purpose of food, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāle vikālasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the right time, but he perceives it as the wrong time, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāle vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the right time, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāle kālasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the right time, and he perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ sati paccaye paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when there is a reason, he uses post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikālabhojanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on eating at the wrong time, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
