<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc64_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">64. Duṭṭhullasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">64. The training rule on what is grave </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto sañcetanikaṁ sukkavissaṭṭhiṁ āpattiṁ āpajjitvā bhātuno saddhivihārikassa bhikkhuno ārocesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Upananda the Sakyan had committed an offense of intentional emission of semen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṁ, āvuso, sañcetanikaṁ sukkavissaṭṭhiṁ āpattiṁ āpanno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He told his brother’s student about this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā kassaci ārocehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">adding, “Don’t tell anyone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sañcetanikaṁ sukkavissaṭṭhiṁ āpattiṁ āpajjitvā saṅghaṁ tassā āpattiyā parivāsaṁ yāci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards another monk also committed an offense of intentional emission of semen. He asked the Sangha for probation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa saṅgho tassā āpattiyā parivāsaṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">which he got. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So parivasanto taṁ bhikkhuṁ passitvā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">While he was on probation, he saw Upananda’s brother’s student and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṁ, āvuso, sañcetanikaṁ sukkavissaṭṭhiṁ āpattiṁ āpajjitvā saṅghaṁ tassā āpattiyā parivāsaṁ yāciṁ, tassa me saṅgho tassā āpattiyā parivāsaṁ adāsi, sohaṁ parivasāmi, vediyāmahaṁ, āvuso, vediyatīti maṁ āyasmā dhāretū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve committed an offense of intentional emission of semen. I asked the Sangha for probation, which I got. I’m now undergoing probation. Please remember me as such.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ nu kho, āvuso, yo aññopi imaṁ āpattiṁ āpajjati sopi evaṁ karotī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do others who have committed this offense need to do the same?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayaṁ, āvuso, āyasmā upanando sakyaputto sañcetanikaṁ sukkavissaṭṭhiṁ āpattiṁ āpajjitvā so me āroceti mā kassaci ārocehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Upananda committed this offense and told me not to tell anyone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ pana tvaṁ, āvuso, paṭicchādesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“So did you conceal it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk then told other monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu bhikkhussa jānaṁ duṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ paṭicchādessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a monk knowingly conceal a monk’s grave offense?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, bhikkhussa jānaṁ duṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ paṭicchādesī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, bhikkhussa jānaṁ duṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ paṭicchādessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhussa jānaṁ duṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ paṭicchādeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk knowingly conceals a monk’s grave offense, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhussāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk’s: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa bhikkhussa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another monk’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowingly: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti aññe vā tassa ārocenti, so vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the offender has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullā nāma āpatti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Grave offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri ca pārājikāni terasa ca saṅghādisesā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the four offenses entailing expulsion and the thirteen offenses entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭicchādeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Conceals: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ jānitvā codessanti, sāressanti khuṁsessanti, vambhessanti, maṅkuṁ karissanti nārocessāmī”ti dhuraṁ nikkhittamatte, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">thinking, “If they find out about this, they’ll accuse him, remind him, scold him, censure him, humiliate him; I won’t tell,” then by the mere fact of giving up his duty, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullāya āpattiyā duṭṭhullāpattisaññī paṭicchādeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a grave offense, and he perceives it as such, and he conceals it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullāya āpattiyā vematiko paṭicchādeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a grave offense, but he is unsure of it, and he conceals it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullāya āpattiyā aduṭṭhullāpattisaññī paṭicchādeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a grave offense, but he perceives it as minor, and he conceals it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aduṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ paṭicchādeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he conceals a minor offense, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannassa duṭṭhullaṁ vā aduṭṭhullaṁ vā ajjhācāraṁ paṭicchādeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he conceals the grave or minor misconduct of one who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aduṭṭhullāya āpattiyā duṭṭhullāpattisaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a minor offense, but he perceives it as grave, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aduṭṭhullāya āpattiyā vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a minor offense, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aduṭṭhullāya āpattiyā aduṭṭhullāpattisaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a minor offense, and he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅghassa bhaṇḍanaṁ vā kalaho vā viggaho vā vivādo vā bhavissatī”ti nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not tell because he thinks there will be quarrels or disputes in the Sangha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅghabhedo vā saṅgharāji vā bhavissatī”ti nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not tell because he thinks there will be a fracture or schism in the Sangha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ kakkhaḷo pharuso jīvitantarāyaṁ vā brahmacariyantarāyaṁ vā karissatī”ti nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not tell because he thinks the person he is telling about is cruel and harsh and that he might become a danger to life or to the living of the spiritual life; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññe patirūpe bhikkhū apassanto nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not tell because he does not see any suitable monks; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nachādetukāmo nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not tell, but not because he wants to conceal; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paññāyissati sakena kammenā”ti nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not tell because he thinks the other person will be known through his own actions; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on what is grave, the fourth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
