<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc87_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on precious things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">87. Mañcapīṭhasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">87. The training rule on beds and benches </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto ucce mañce sayati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Upananda the Sakyan was sleeping on a high bed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sambahulehi bhikkhūhi saddhiṁ senāsanacārikaṁ āhiṇḍanto yenāyasmato upanandassa sakyaputtassa vihāro tenupasaṅkami.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion, as the Buddha and a number of monks were walking about the dwellings, they came to Upananda’s dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto bhagavantaṁ dūratova āgacchantaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Upananda saw the Buddha coming </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhagavantaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgacchatu me, bhante, bhagavā sayanaṁ passatū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, please come and see my bed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tatova paṭinivattitvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha turned around on the spot and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āsayato, bhikkhave, moghapuriso veditabbo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“A fool, monks, can be recognized by his sleeping place.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā dubbharatāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After criticizing Upananda in many ways, the Buddha spoke in dispraise of being difficult to support … the Buddha said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navaṁ pana bhikkhunā mañcaṁ vā pīṭhaṁ vā kārayamānena aṭṭhaṅgulapādakaṁ kāretabbaṁ sugataṅgulena, aññatra heṭṭhimāya aṭaniyā; taṁ atikkāmayato chedanakaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk is having a new bed or bench made, it is to have legs eight standard fingerbreadths long below the lowest frame. If the legs exceed that, they are to be cut down, and he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">New: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karaṇaṁ upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">newly made is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañco nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A bed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro mañcā— masārako, bundikābaddho, kuḷīrapādako, āhaccapādako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of beds: one with legs and frame, called _masāraka_; one with legs and frame, called _bundikābaddha_; one with crooked legs; one with detachable legs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pīṭhaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A bench: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri pīṭhāni— masārakaṁ, bundikābaddhaṁ, kuḷīrapādakaṁ, āhaccapādakaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of benches: one with legs and frame, called _masāraka_; one with legs and frame, called _bundikābaddha_; one with crooked legs; one with detachable legs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārayamānenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is having made: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karonto vā kārāpento vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">making it himself or having it made. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhaṅgulapādakaṁ kāretabbaṁ sugataṅgulena, aññatra heṭṭhimāya aṭaniyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is to have legs eight standard fingerbreadths long below the lowest frame: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā heṭṭhimaṁ aṭaniṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the lowest frame. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṁ atikkāmetvā karoti vā kārāpeti vā, payoge dukkaṭaṁ, paṭilābhena chinditvā pācittiyaṁ desetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes one, or has one made, that exceeds that, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. When he gets it, the legs are to be cut down, and he is then to confess an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes himself what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññassatthāya karoti vā kārāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes one or has one made for the benefit of someone else, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gets one that was made by someone else and then uses it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pamāṇikaṁ karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes it the right size; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakaṁ karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes it smaller than the right size; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññena kataṁ pamāṇātikkantaṁ paṭilabhitvā chinditvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets one made by another that exceeds the right size and then cuts the legs down before using it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañcapīṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on beds and benches, the fifth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
