<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc65_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">65. Ūnavīsativassasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">65. The training rule on less than twenty years old </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rājagahe sattarasavaggiyā dārakā sahāyakā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time in Rājagaha there was a group of seventeen boys who were friends, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upālidārako tesaṁ pāmokkho hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">with Upāli as their leader. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho upālissa mātāpitūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Upāli’s parents considered, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kena nu kho upāyena upāli amhākaṁ accayena sukhañca jīveyya na ca kilameyyā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can we make sure that Upāli is able to live happily without exhausting himself after we’ve passed away? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho upālissa mātāpitūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace kho upāli lekhaṁ sikkheyya, evaṁ kho upāli amhākaṁ accayena sukhañca jīveyya, na ca kilameyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He could become a clerk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho upālissa mātāpitūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace kho upāli lekhaṁ sikkhissati, aṅguliyo dukkhā bhavissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but then his fingers will hurt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho upāli gaṇanaṁ sikkheyya, evaṁ kho upāli amhākaṁ accayena sukhañca jīveyya na ca kilameyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Or he could become an accountant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho upālissa mātāpitūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace kho upāli gaṇanaṁ sikkhissati, urassa dukkho bhavissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but then his chest will hurt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho upāli rūpaṁ sikkheyya, evaṁ kho upāli amhākaṁ accayena sukhañca jīveyya na ca kilameyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Or he could become a banker, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho upālissa mātāpitūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace kho upāli rūpaṁ sikkhissati, akkhīni dukkhā bhavissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but then his eyes will hurt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho samaṇā sakyaputtiyā sukhasīlā sukhasamācārā subhojanāni bhuñjitvā nivātesu sayanesu sayanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But these Sakyan monastics have pleasant habits and a happy life. They eat nice food and sleep in beds sheltered from the wind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho upāli samaṇesu sakyaputtiyesu pabbajeyya, evaṁ kho upāli amhākaṁ accayena sukhañca jīveyya, na ca kilameyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If Upāli goes forth with them, he’ll be able to live happily without exhausting himself after we’ve passed away.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho upālidārako mātāpitūnaṁ imaṁ kathāsallāpaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Upāli overheard this conversation between his parents. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho upālidārako yena te dārakā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te dārake etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then went to the other boys and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etha mayaṁ, ayyā, samaṇesu sakyaputtiyesu pabbajissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, let’s go forth with the Sakyan monastics.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace kho tvaṁ, ayya, pabbajissasi, evaṁ mayampi pabbajissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If you go forth, so will we.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te dārakā ekamekassa mātāpitaro upasaṅkamitvā etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The boys went each to his own parents and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānātha maṁ agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajjāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please allow me to go forth into homelessness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tesaṁ dārakānaṁ mātāpitaro—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sabbepime dārakā samānacchandā kalyāṇādhippāyā”ti anujāniṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Since the parents knew that the boys all had the same desire and good intention, they gave their approval. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhikkhū upasaṅkamitvā pabbajjaṁ yāciṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The boys then went to the monks and asked for the going forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhikkhū pabbājesuṁ upasampādesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the monks gave them the going forth and the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te rattiyā paccūsasamayaṁ paccuṭṭhāya rodanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards they got up early in the morning and cried, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāguṁ detha, bhattaṁ detha, khādanīyaṁ dethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give us rice porridge, give us a meal, give us fresh food.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgametha, āvuso, yāva ratti vibhāyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wait until it gets light. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace yāgu bhavissati, pivissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If any of that becomes available then, you can have it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace bhattaṁ bhavissati, bhuñjissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace khādanīyaṁ bhavissati, khādissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce bhavissati yāgu vā bhattaṁ vā khādanīyaṁ vā, piṇḍāya caritvā bhuñjissathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If not, you’ll eat after walking for alms.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho te bhikkhū bhikkhūhi vuccamānā rodantiyeva—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But they carried on as before. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāguṁ detha, bhattaṁ detha, khādanīyaṁ dethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Senāsanaṁ ūhadantipi ummihantipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they defecated and urinated on the furniture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho bhagavā rattiyā paccūsasamayaṁ paccuṭṭhāya dārakasaddaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rising early in the morning, the Buddha heard the sound of those boys. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvāna āyasmantaṁ ānandaṁ āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He asked Venerable Ānanda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ nu kho so, ānanda, dārakasaddo”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who told him what was happening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā bhikkhū paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū jānaṁ ūnavīsativassaṁ puggalaṁ upasampādentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the monks give the full ordination to people they know are less than twenty years old?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā jānaṁ ūnavīsativassaṁ puggalaṁ upasampādessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakavīsativasso, bhikkhave, puggalo akkhamo hoti sītassa uṇhassa jighacchāya pipāsāya ḍaṁsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassānaṁ duruttānaṁ durāgatānaṁ vacanapathānaṁ uppannānaṁ sārīrikānaṁ vedanānaṁ dukkhānaṁ tibbānaṁ kharānaṁ kaṭukānaṁ asātānaṁ amanāpānaṁ pāṇaharānaṁ anadhivāsakajātiko hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who is less than twenty years old is unable to endure cold and heat; hunger and thirst; horseflies, mosquitoes, wind, and the burning sun; creeping animals and insects; and rude and unwelcome speech. And they are unable to bear up with bodily feelings that are painful, severe, sharp, and destructive of life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīsativassova kho, bhikkhave, puggalo khamo hoti sītassa uṇhassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">But a person who’s twenty is able to endure these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṇaharānaṁ adhivāsakajātiko hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ ūnavīsativassaṁ puggalaṁ upasampādeyya, so ca puggalo anupasampanno, te ca bhikkhū gārayhā, idaṁ tasmiṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk gives the full ordination to a person he knows is less than twenty years old, he commits an offense entailing confession. Moreover, that person has not received the full ordination and those monks are blameworthy.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti, aññe vā tassa ārocenti, so vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the candidate has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnavīsativasso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Less than twenty years old: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appattavīsativasso.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has not reached twenty years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Upasampādessāmī”ti gaṇaṁ vā ācariyaṁ vā pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā pariyesati, sīmaṁ vā sammannati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, intending to give the full ordination, he searches for a group, a teacher, a bowl, or a robe, or he establishes a monastic boundary, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi dukkaṭā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne upajjhāyassa āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, the preceptor commits an offense entailing confession, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇassa ca ācariyassa ca āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">while the group and the teacher commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnavīsativasse ūnavīsativassasaññī upasampādeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is less than twenty years old, and he perceives them as less, and he gives them the full ordination, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnavīsativasse vematiko upasampādeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is less than twenty years old, but he is unsure of it, and he gives them the full ordination, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnavīsativasse paripuṇṇavīsativassasaññī upasampādeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is less than twenty years old, but he perceives them as more, and he gives them the full ordination, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripuṇṇavīsativasse ūnavīsativassasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is more than twenty years old, but he perceives them as less, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripuṇṇavīsativasse vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is more than twenty years old, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripuṇṇavīsativasse paripuṇṇavīsativassasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is more than twenty years old, and he perceives them as more, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnavīsativassaṁ paripuṇṇavīsativassasaññī upasampādeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives the full ordination to someone less than twenty years old, but he perceives them as more than twenty; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paripuṇṇavīsativassaṁ paripuṇṇavīsativassasaññī upasampādeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives the full ordination to someone more than twenty years old, and he perceives them as more than twenty; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnavīsativassasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on less than twenty years old, the fifth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
