<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np22_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">22. Ūnapañcabandhanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">22. The training rule on fewer than five mends </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṁ nigrodhārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the Sakyan country in the Banyan Tree Monastery at Kapilavatthu. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarena kumbhakārena bhikkhū pavāritā honti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a potter had invited the monks, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yesaṁ ayyānaṁ pattena attho ahaṁ pattenā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If any of you needs an almsbowl, I’ll provide it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū patte viññāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the monks had no sense of moderation, and they asked for many bowls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṁ khuddakā pattā te mahante patte viññāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who had small bowls asked for large ones, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṁ mahantā pattā te khuddake patte viññāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and those who had large bowls asked for small ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so kumbhakāro bhikkhūnaṁ bahū patte karonto na sakkoti aññaṁ vikkāyikaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ kātuṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The potter was so busy making bowls for the monks that he was unable to make goods for sale. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāpi na yāpeti, puttadārāpissa kilamanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He could not make a living for himself, and his wives and children suffered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū patte viññāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics have no sense of moderation and ask for many bowls? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ imesaṁ bahū patte karonto na sakkoti aññaṁ vikkāyikaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ kātuṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">This potter is so busy making bowls for them that he is unable to make goods for sale. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāpi na yāpeti, puttadārāpissa kilamantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is unable to make a living for himself, and his wives and children are suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū patte viññāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those monks have no sense of moderation and ask for many bowls?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū te anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū patte viññāpentīti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that there are monks who do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū patte viññāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vigarahitvā dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After criticizing them, he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na, bhikkhave, patto viññāpetabbo. Yo viññāpeyya, āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, a monk should not ask for an almsbowl. If he does, he commits an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno patto bhinno hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the bowl of a certain monk broke. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu—“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ pattaṁ viññāpetun”ti kukkuccāyanto na viññāpeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that the Buddha had prohibited asking for a bowl and being afraid of wrongdoing, he did not ask for a new one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthesu piṇḍāya carati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a consequence, he collected almsfood with his hands. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā hatthesu piṇḍāya carissanti, seyyathāpi titthiyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics collect almsfood with their hands, just like the monastics of other religions?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, naṭṭhapattassa vā bhinnapattassa vā pattaṁ viññāpetun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to ask for a new almsbowl if your bowl has been lost or is broken.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū—“bhagavatā anuññātaṁ naṭṭhapattassa vā bhinnapattassa vā pattaṁ viññāpetun”ti appamattakenapi bhinnena appamattakenapi khaṇḍena vilikhitamattenapi bahū patte viññāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When they knew about the Buddha’s allowance, the monks from the group of six asked for many bowls even if their existing bowl only had a minor chip or scratch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so kumbhakāro bhikkhūnaṁ tatheva bahū patte karonto na sakkoti aññaṁ vikkāyikaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ kātuṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Once again that potter was so busy making bowls for the monks that he was unable to make goods for sale. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāpi na yāpeti, puttadārāpissa kilamanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He could not make a living for himself, and his wives and children suffered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā tatheva ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And people complained and criticized them as before. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū patte viññāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ imesaṁ bahū patte karonto na sakkoti aññaṁ vikkāyikaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ kātuṁ, attanāpi na yāpeti, puttadārāpissa kilamantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū appamattakenapi bhinnena appamattakenapi khaṇḍena vilikhitamattenapi bahū patte viññāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six ask for many bowls even if their existing bowl only has a minor chip or scratch?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, appamattakenapi bhinnena appamattakenapi khaṇḍena vilikhitamattenapi bahū patte viññāpethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, appamattakenapi bhinnena appamattakenapi khaṇḍena vilikhitamattenapi bahū patte viññāpessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu ūnapañcabandhanena pattena aññaṁ navaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk exchanges an almsbowl with fewer than five mends for a new almsbowl, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā so patto bhikkhuparisāya nissajjitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk should relinquish that almsbowl to a gathering of monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca tassā bhikkhuparisāya pattapariyanto so tassa bhikkhuno padātabbo— ‘ayaṁ te, bhikkhu, patto yāva bhedanāya dhāretabbo’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should then be given the last almsbowl belonging to that gathering: “Monk, this bowl is yours. Keep it until it breaks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ tattha sāmīcī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the proper procedure.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnapañcabandhano nāma patto</span></p>
<p class="p3">An almsbowl with fewer than five mends: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abandhano vā ekabandhano vā dvibandhano vā tibandhano vā catubandhano vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it has no mends, one mend, two mends, three mends, or four mends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanokāso nāma patto</span></p>
<p class="p3">An almsbowl with a mend that does not count: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa dvaṅgulā rāji na hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one that does not have a fracture of 3.5 cm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bandhanokāso nāma patto</span></p>
<p class="p3">An almsbowl with a mend that counts: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa dvaṅgulā rāji hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one that does have a fracture of 3.5 cm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">New almsbowl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">patto viññattiṁ upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">asked for is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Exchanges: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he asks, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets the bowl, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghamajjhe nissajjitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It should be relinquished in the midst of the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbeheva adhiṭṭhitapattaṁ gahetvā sannipatitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">All determined bowls should be brought together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na lāmako patto adhiṭṭhātabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should not determine an inferior bowl, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahagghaṁ pattaṁ gahessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ll get a valuable one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace lāmakaṁ pattaṁ adhiṭṭheti— “mahagghaṁ pattaṁ gahessāmī”ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If one determine an inferior bowl, thinking, “I’ll get a valuable one,” one commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha, that monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior monks. He should then squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ me, bhante, patto ūnapañcabandhanena pattena cetāpito nissaggiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this almsbowl, which I got in exchange for a bowl that had fewer than five mends, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, he should confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena āpatti paṭiggahetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by a competent and capable monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahaṅgehi samannāgato bhikkhu pattaggāhāpako sammannitabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk who has five qualities should be appointed as the distributor of almsbowls: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo na chandāgatiṁ gaccheyya, na dosāgatiṁ gaccheyya, na mohāgatiṁ gaccheyya, na bhayāgatiṁ gaccheyya, gāhitāgāhitañca jāneyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who is not swayed by desire, ill will, confusion, or fear, and who knows what has and has not been distributed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, sammannitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this is how he should be appointed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṁ bhikkhu yācitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">First the monk should be asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yācitvā byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and then a competent and capable monk should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ pattaggāhāpakaṁ sammanneyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, it should appoint monk so-and-so as the distributor of almsbowls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ pattaggāhāpakaṁ sammannati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha appoints monk so-and-so as the distributor of almsbowls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno pattaggāhāpakassa sammuti, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who agrees to appointing monk so-and-so as the distributor of almsbowls should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who doesn’t agree should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammato saṅghena itthannāmo bhikkhu pattaggāhāpako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has appointed monk so-and-so as the distributor of almsbowls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena sammatena bhikkhunā patto gāhetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The appointed monk should give away that relinquished bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thero vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should tell the most senior monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gaṇhātu, bhante, thero pattan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, would you like this bowl?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace thero gaṇhāti, therassa patto dutiyassa gāhetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the most senior monk takes it, his old bowl should be offered to the next monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca tassa anuddayatāya na gahetabbo. Yo na gaṇheyya, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should not not take that bowl out of sympathy. If he does, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apattakassa na gāhetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is not to be offered to anyone who does not have bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eteneva upāyena yāva saṅghanavakā gāhetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this manner it should be offered all the way to the most junior monk in the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca tassā bhikkhuparisāya pattapariyanto, so tassa bhikkhuno padātabbo— “ayaṁ te, bhikkhu, patto yāva bhedanāya dhāretabbo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should then be given the last almsbowl belonging to that gathering: “Monk, this bowl is yours. Keep it until it breaks”: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā so patto na adese nikkhipitabbo, na abhogena bhuñjitabbo, na vissajjetabbo— “kathāyaṁ patto nasseyya vā vinasseyya vā bhijjeyya vā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk is not to store that bowl in an unsuitable place, use it in an unsuitable way, or give it away, thinking, “How may this bowl be lost, ruined, or broken?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace adese vā nikkhipati abhogena vā bhuñjati vissajjeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stores it in an unsuitable place, uses it in an unsuitable way, or gives it away, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ tattha sāmīcīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the proper procedure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṁ tattha anudhammatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the right method. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanena pattena abandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends for a bowl without mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanena pattena ekabandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends for a bowl with one mend, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanena pattena dvibandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends for a bowl with two mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanena pattena tibandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends for a bowl with three mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanena pattena catubandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends for a bowl with four mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekabandhanena pattena abandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with one mend for a bowl without mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekabandhanena pattena ekabandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with one mend for a bowl with one mend, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekabandhanena pattena dvibandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with one mend for a bowl with two mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekabandhanena pattena tibandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with one mend for a bowl with three mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekabandhanena pattena catubandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with one mend for a bowl with four mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvibandhanena pattena abandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with two mends for a bowl without mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvibandhanena pattena ekabandhanaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with two mends for a bowl with one mend … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with two mends for a bowl with four mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tibandhanena pattena abandhanaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with three mends for a bowl without mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekabandhanaṁ pattaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with one mend … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with three mends for a bowl with four mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catubandhanena pattena abandhanaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with four mends for a bowl without mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekabandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with one mend … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with four mends for a bowl with four mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanena pattena abandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends for a bowl without mends that count, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanena pattena ekabandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends for a bowl with one mend that counts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends for a bowl with four mends that count, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekabandhanena pattena abandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with one mend for a bowl without mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekabandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with one mend that counts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with one mend for a bowl with four mends that count, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvibandhanena pattena abandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with two mends for a bowl without mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with two mends for a bowl with four mends that count, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tibandhanena pattena abandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with three mends for a bowl without mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with three mends for a bowl with four mends that count, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catubandhanena pattena abandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with four mends for a bowl without mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekabandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with one mend that counts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with four mends for a bowl with four mends that count, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanokāsena pattena abandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends that count for a bowl without mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanokāsena pattena ekabandhanaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends that count for a bowl with one mend … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with four mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catubandhanokāsena pattena abandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with four mends that count for a bowl without mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catubandhanokāsena pattena ekabandhanaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with four mends that count for a bowl with one mend … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with four mends that count for a bowl with four mends, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abandhanokāsena pattena abandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends that count for a bowl without mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekabandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with one mend that counts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl without mends that count for a bowl with four mends that count, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catubandhanokāsena pattena abandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with four mends that count for a bowl without mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekabandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with one mend that counts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with two mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tibandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">for a bowl with three mends that count … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubandhanokāsaṁ pattaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges a bowl with four mends that count for a bowl with four mends that count, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">naṭṭhapattassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if his almsbowl is lost; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhinnapattassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if his almsbowl is broken; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of his own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnapañcabandhanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on less than five mends, the second, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
