<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk74_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pādukavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on shoes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">74. Hariteuccārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">74. The training rule on defecating on cultivated plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū harite uccārampi passāvampi kheḷampi karonti …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six were defecating, urinating, and spitting on cultivated plants. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na harite agilāno uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karissāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘When not sick, I will not defecate, urinate, or spit on cultivated plants,’ this is how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na harite agilānena uccāro vā passāvo vā kheḷo vā kātabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If one is not sick, one should not defecate, urinate, or spit on cultivated plants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca harite agilāno uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karoti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, out of disrespect, a monk who is not sick defecates, urinates, or spits on cultivated plants, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appaharite kato haritaṁ ottharati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does it in a place with no cultivated plants, but it then spreads to cultivated plants; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cuddasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourteenth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
