<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pd4_root-pli-ms.j. Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">4. Catutthapāṭidesanīyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">4. The fourth training rule on acknowledgment </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṁ nigrodhārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying in the Sakyan country in the Banyan Tree Monastery at Kapilavatthu, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sākiyadāsakā avaruddhā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the slaves of the Sakyans were rebelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sākiyāniyo icchanti āraññakesu senāsanesu bhattaṁ kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sakyan women wished to prepare a meal at the wilderness dwellings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho sākiyadāsakā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the slaves heard about this </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sākiyāniyo kira āraññakesu senāsanesu bhattaṁ kattukāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te magge pariyuṭṭhiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and infested the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sākiyāniyo paṇītaṁ khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ ādāya āraññakaṁ senāsanaṁ agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Sakyan women took various kinds of fine food and set out for a wilderness dwelling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sākiyadāsakā nikkhamitvā sākiyāniyo acchindiṁsu ca dūsesuñca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the slaves emerged, and they robbed and raped those Sakyan women. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sākiyā nikkhamitvā te core sabhaṇḍe gahetvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Sakyan men came out, and they got hold of those criminals together with their loot. They then complained and criticized the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhadantā ārāme core paṭivasante nārocessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could they not announce that there are criminals staying in the monastery?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū sākiyānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of the Sakyans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tena hi, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññapessāmi dasa atthavase paṭicca saṅghasuṭṭhutāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, monks, I will lay down a training rule for the following ten reasons: for the well-being of the Sangha, for the comfort of the Sangha, for the restraint of bad people, for the ease of well-behaved monks, for the restraint of corruptions relating to the present life, for the restraint of corruptions relating to future lives, to give rise to confidence in those without it, to increase the confidence of those who have it, for the longevity of the true Teaching, and for supporting the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kho pana tāni āraññakāni senāsanāni sāsaṅkasammatāni sappaṭibhayāni, yo pana bhikkhu tathārūpesu senāsanesu pubbe appaṭisaṁviditaṁ khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā ajjhārāme sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, paṭidesetabbaṁ tena bhikkhunā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are wilderness dwellings that are considered risky and dangerous. If a monk, without first making an announcement about those dwellings, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it inside that monastery, he must acknowledge it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gārayhaṁ, āvuso, dhammaṁ āpajjiṁ asappāyaṁ pāṭidesanīyaṁ taṁ paṭidesemī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have done a blameworthy and unsuitable thing that is to be acknowledged. I acknowledge it.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu āraññakesu senāsanesu gilāno hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a monk in a wilderness dwelling was sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā ādāya āraññakaṁ senāsanaṁ agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">People took fresh or cooked food and went to that wilderness dwelling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te manussā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they invited that monk to eat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhuñjatha, bhante”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ āraññakesu senāsanesu khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādituṁ bhuñjitun”ti kukkuccāyanto na paṭiggahesi, nāsakkhi piṇḍāya carituṁ, chinnabhatto ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But knowing that the Buddha had prohibited the eating of fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it at a wilderness dwelling, and being afraid of wrongdoing, he did not accept it. And being unable to walk for alms, he missed his meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then told the monks what had happened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānena bhikkhunā āraññakesu senāsanesu pubbe appaṭisaṁviditaṁ khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādituṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a sick monk, without first making an announcement, to eat fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it at a wilderness dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kho pana tāni āraññakāni senāsanāni sāsaṅkasammatāni sappaṭibhayāni, yo pana bhikkhu tathārūpesu senāsanesu pubbe appaṭisaṁviditaṁ khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā ajjhārāme sahatthā paṭiggahetvā agilāno khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, paṭidesetabbaṁ tena bhikkhunā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are wilderness dwellings that are considered risky and dangerous. If a monk who is not sick, without first making an announcement about those dwellings, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it inside that monastery, he must acknowledge it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gārayhaṁ, āvuso, dhammaṁ āpajjiṁ asappāyaṁ pāṭidesanīyaṁ, taṁ paṭidesemī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have done a blameworthy and unsuitable thing that is to be acknowledged. I acknowledge it.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kho pana tāni āraññakāni senāsanānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are wilderness dwellings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraññakaṁ nāma senāsanaṁ pañcadhanusatikaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a wilderness dwelling: if it is at least 800 meters away from any inhabited area. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāsaṅkaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Risky: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāme ārāmūpacāre corānaṁ niviṭṭhokāso dissati, bhuttokāso dissati, ṭhitokāso dissati, nisinnokāso dissati, nipannokāso dissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in the monastery, or in the vicinity of the monastery, criminals have been seen camped, eating, standing, seated, or lying down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappaṭibhayaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dangerous: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāme ārāmūpacāre corehi manussā hatā dissanti, viluttā dissanti, ākoṭitā dissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in the monastery, or in the vicinity of the monastery, criminals have been seen injuring, robbing, or beating people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathārūpesu senāsanesūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">About those dwellings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evarūpesu senāsanesu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">about such kinds of dwellings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without making an announcement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ paṭisaṁviditaṁ, etaṁ appaṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if an announcement is made to any of one’s five co-monastics, this is called “without making an announcement”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmaṁ ārāmūpacāraṁ ṭhapetvā paṭisaṁviditaṁ, etaṁ appaṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If an announcement is made about anything apart from the monastery or its vicinity, this is called “without making an announcement”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Making an announcement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci itthī vā puriso vā ārāmaṁ ārāmūpacāraṁ āgantvā āroceti— “itthannāmassa, bhante, khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā āharissantī”ti. Sace sāsaṅkaṁ hoti, sāsaṅkanti ācikkhitabbaṁ; sace sappaṭibhayaṁ hoti, sappaṭibhayanti ācikkhitabbaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a woman or a man comes to the monastery or the vicinity of the monastery and says, “Venerable, they’ll bring so-and-so’s fresh or cooked food,” then, if it is risky, this should be declared, and if it is dangerous, that should be declared. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace— “hotu, bhante, āhariyissatī”ti bhaṇati, corā vattabbā— “manussā idhūpacaranti apasakkathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person says, “Never mind, it will be brought,” then the criminals are to be told, “People are coming here; go away.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāguyā paṭisaṁvidite tassā parivāro āhariyyati, etaṁ paṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When an announcement has been made in regard to rice porridge, and accompanying food is brought, this is called “announced”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhattena paṭisaṁvidite tassa parivāro āhariyyati, etaṁ paṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When an announcement has been made in regard to rice, and accompanying food is brought, this is called “announced”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyena paṭisaṁvidite tassa parivāro āhariyyati, etaṁ paṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When an announcement has been made in regard to fresh food, and accompanying food is brought, this is called “announced”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulena paṭisaṁvidite yo tasmiṁ kule manusso khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā āharati, etaṁ paṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When an announcement has been made in regard to a particular family, then when any person from that family brings fresh or cooked food, this is called “announced”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāmena paṭisaṁvidite yo tasmiṁ gāme manusso khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā āharati, etaṁ paṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When an announcement has been made in regard to a particular village, then when any person from that village brings fresh or cooked food, this is called “announced”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pūgena paṭisaṁvidite yo tasmiṁ pūge manusso khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā āharati, etaṁ paṭisaṁviditaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When an announcement has been made in regard to a particular association, then when any person from that association brings fresh or cooked food, this is called “announced”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, the post-midday tonics, the seven-day tonics, and the lifetime tonics—the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhārāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Inside that monastery: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parikkhittassa ārāmassa antoārāmo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monastery is enclosed, then within the enclosure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittassa upacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monastery is unenclosed, then in the vicinity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is not sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkoti piṇḍāya carituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is able to walk for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkoti piṇḍāya carituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is unable to walk for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭisaṁviditaṁ agilāno “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, without making an announcement, one who is not sick receives fresh or cooked food with the intention of eating it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭisaṁvidite appaṭisaṁviditasaññī khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā ajjhārāme sahatthā paṭiggahetvā agilāno khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there has been no announcement, and he does not perceive that there has, and he, not being sick, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it inside that monastery, then he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭisaṁvidite vematiko khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā ajjhārāme sahatthā paṭiggahetvā agilāno khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there has been no announcement, but he is unsure of it, and he, not being sick, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it inside that monastery, then he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭisaṁvidite paṭisaṁviditasaññī khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā ajjhārāme sahatthā paṭiggahetvā agilāno khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there has been no announcement, but he perceives that there has, and he, not being sick, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it inside that monastery, then he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ āhāratthāya paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics for the purpose of food, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭisaṁvidite appaṭisaṁviditasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there has been an announcement, but he does not perceive that there has, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭisaṁvidite vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there has been an announcement, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭisaṁvidite paṭisaṁviditasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there has been an announcement, and he perceives that there has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭisaṁvidite,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there has been an announcement; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭisaṁvidite vā gilānassa vā sesakaṁ bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats the leftovers from where there has been an announcement or from one who is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahārāme paṭiggahetvā antoārāme bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he receives the food outside the monastery and then eats it inside; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha jātakaṁ mūlaṁ vā tacaṁ vā pattaṁ vā pupphaṁ vā phalaṁ vā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats a root, bark, a leaf, a flower, or a fruit originating in that monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ sati paccaye paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when there is a reason, he uses post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthapāṭidesanīyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth training rule entailing acknowledgment is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā kho, āyasmanto, cattāro pāṭidesanīyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, the four rules on acknowledgment have been recited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyasmante pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In regard to this I ask you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhetthāyasmanto, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You are pure in this and therefore silent. I will remember it thus.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
