<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np21_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">21. Pattasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">21. The training rule on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bahū patte sannicayaṁ karonti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six were storing up many almsbowls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā vihāracārikaṁ āhiṇḍantā passitvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people walking about dwellings saw this, they complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā bahū patte sannicayaṁ karissanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics store up many bowls? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pattavāṇijjaṁ vā samaṇā sakyaputtiyā karissanti āmattikāpaṇaṁ vā pasāressantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Are they starting up as bowl merchants or setting up a bowl shop?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū atirekapattaṁ dhāressantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six keep extra bowls?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, atirekapattaṁ dhārethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, atirekapattaṁ dhāressatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu atirekapattaṁ dhāreyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk keeps an extra almsbowl, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato ānandassa atirekapatto uppanno hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards Venerable Ānanda received an extra bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ca ānando taṁ pattaṁ āyasmato sāriputtassa dātukāmo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He wanted to give it to Venerable Sāriputta, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ca sāriputto sākete viharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who was staying at Sāketa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato ānandassa etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that the Buddha had laid down a rule against keeping an extra bowl, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na atirekapatto dhāretabbo’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayañca me atirekapatto uppanno.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañcimaṁ pattaṁ āyasmato sāriputtassa dātukāmo.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ca sāriputto sākete viharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ nu kho mayā paṭipajjitabban”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Ānanda thought, “What should I do in this situation?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He told the Buddha, who said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kīvaciraṁ panānanda, sāriputto āgacchissatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How long is it, Ānanda, before Sāriputta returns?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navamaṁ vā, bhagavā, divasaṁ dasamaṁ vā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nine or ten days, Venerable Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, dasāhaparamaṁ atirekapattaṁ dhāretuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, you should keep an extra almsbowl for ten days at the most. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasāhaparamaṁ atirekapatto dhāretabbo. Taṁ atikkāmayato nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A monk should keep an extra almsbowl for ten days at the most. If he keeps it beyond that, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhaparamanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">For ten days at the most: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasāhaparamatā dhāretabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it should be kept ten days at a maximum. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekapatto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An extra almsbowl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anadhiṭṭhito avikappito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a bowl that is not determined, nor transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An almsbowl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve pattā ayopatto mattikāpattoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two kinds of bowls: the iron bowl and the clay bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayo pattassa vaṇṇā ukkaṭṭho patto majjhimo patto omako patto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are three sizes of bowls: the large bowl, the medium bowl, and the small bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkaṭṭho nāma patto aḍḍhāḷhakodanaṁ gaṇhāti catubhāgaṁ khādanaṁ tadupiyaṁ byañjanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The large bowl: it takes half an _āḷhaka_ measure of rice, a fourth part of fresh food, and a suitable amount of curry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majjhimo nāma patto nāḷikodanaṁ gaṇhāti catubhāgaṁ khādanaṁ tadupiyaṁ byañjanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The medium bowl: it takes a _nāḷika_ measure of rice, a fourth part of fresh food, and a suitable amount of curry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Omako nāma patto patthodanaṁ gaṇhāti catubhāgaṁ khādanaṁ tadupiyaṁ byañjanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The small bowl: it takes a _pattha_ measure of rice, a fourth part of fresh food, and a suitable amount of curry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ukkaṭṭho apatto, omako apatto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Anything larger than this is not a bowl, nor anything smaller. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ atikkāmayato nissaggiyo hotīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he keeps it beyond that, it becomes subject to relinquishment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekādase aruṇuggamane nissaggiyo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it becomes subject to relinquishment at dawn on the eleventh day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbo saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The bowl should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha, that monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior monks. He should then squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ me, bhante, patto dasāhātikkanto nissaggiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this almsbowl, which I have kept over ten days, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, he should confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena āpatti paṭiggahetabbā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by a competent and capable monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nissaṭṭhapatto dātabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The relinquished bowl is then to be given back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ patto itthannāmassa bhikkhuno nissaggiyo saṅghassa nissaṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This almsbowl, which was to be relinquished by monk so-and-so, has been relinquished to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho imaṁ pattaṁ itthannāmassa bhikkhuno dadeyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should give this bowl back to monk so-and-so.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā sambahule bhikkhū upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassu vacanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching several monks, that monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior monks. He should then squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ me, bhante, patto dasāhātikkanto nissaggiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this almsbowl, which I have kept over ten days, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ āyasmantānaṁ nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the venerables.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, he should confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena āpatti paṭiggahetabbā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by a competent and capable monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nissaṭṭhapatto dātabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The relinquished bowl is then to be given back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṇantu me āyasmantā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, I ask the venerables to listen to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ patto itthannāmassa bhikkhuno nissaggiyo āyasmantānaṁ nissaṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This almsbowl, which was to be relinquished by monk so-and-so, has been relinquished to you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadāyasmantānaṁ pattakallaṁ, āyasmantā imaṁ pattaṁ itthannāmassa bhikkhuno dadeyyun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to you, you should give this bowl back to monk so-and-so.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā ekaṁ bhikkhuṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching a single monk, that monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder, squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ me, āvuso, patto dasāhātikkanto nissaggiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This almsbowl, which I have kept over ten days, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ āyasmato nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to you.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, he should confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā āpatti paṭiggahetabbā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by that monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nissaṭṭhapatto dātabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The relinquished bowl is then to be given back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ pattaṁ āyasmato dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this almsbowl back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhātikkante atikkantasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than ten days and he perceives it as more, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhātikkante vematiko, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than ten days, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhātikkante anatikkantasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than ten days, but he perceives it as less, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhiṭṭhite adhiṭṭhitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been determined, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avikappite vikappitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been transferred, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avissajjite vissajjitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been given away, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaṭṭhe naṭṭhasaññī nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been lost, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avinaṭṭhe vinaṭṭhasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been ruined, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinne bhinnasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not broken, but he perceives that it is, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avilutte viluttasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been stolen, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyaṁ pattaṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he uses an almsbowl that should be relinquished without first relinquishing it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhānatikkante atikkantasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than ten days, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhānatikkante vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than ten days, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhānatikkante anatikkantasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than ten days and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antodasāhaṁ adhiṭṭheti, vikappeti, vissajjeti, nassati, vinassati, bhijjati, acchinditvā gaṇhanti, vissāsaṁ gaṇhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, within ten days, it is determined, transferred to another, given away, lost, ruined, broken, stolen, or taken on trust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū nissaṭṭhapattaṁ na denti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the monks from the group of six did not give back a relinquished bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na, bhikkhave, nissaṭṭhapatto na dātabbo. Yo na dadeyya, āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, a relinquished alsmbowl should be given back. If you don’t give it back, you commit an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on almsbowls, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
