<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc10_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">10. Pathavīkhaṇanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">10. The training rule on digging the earth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā āḷaviyaṁ viharati aggāḷave cetiye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Āḷavī at the Aggāḷava Shrine, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āḷavakā bhikkhū navakammaṁ karontā pathaviṁ khaṇantipi khaṇāpentipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks there were doing building work. And they dug the earth and had it dug. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā pathaviṁ khaṇissantipi khaṇāpessantipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics dig the earth and have it dug? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekindriyaṁ samaṇā sakyaputtiyā jīvaṁ viheṭhentī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are hurting one-sensed life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āḷavakā bhikkhū pathaviṁ khaṇissantipi khaṇāpessantipī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those monks at Āḷavī dig the earth and have it dug?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, pathaviṁ khaṇathapi khaṇāpethapī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, pathaviṁ khaṇissathapi khaṇāpessathapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jīvasaññino hi, moghapurisā, manussā pathaviyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">People regard the earth as conscious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu pathaviṁ khaṇeyya vā khaṇāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk digs the earth or has it dug, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathavī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The earth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve pathaviyo— jātā ca pathavī ajātā ca pathavī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two kinds of earth: productive earth and unproductive earth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātā nāma pathavī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Productive earth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhapaṁsu suddhamattikā appapāsāṇā appasakkharā appakaṭhalā appamarumbā appavālikā, yebhuyyenapaṁsukā, yebhuyyenamattikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">pure soil, pure clay, with few stones, with few pebbles, with few potsherds, with little gravel, with little sand; mostly soil, mostly clay. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaḍḍhāpi vuccati jātā pathavī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is unburnt, it is also called “productive earth”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi paṁsupuñjo vā mattikāpuñjo vā atirekacātumāsaṁ ovaṭṭho, ayampi vuccati jātā pathavī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A pile of soil or clay that has been rained on for more than four months—this too is called “productive earth”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajātā nāma pathavī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unproductive earth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhapāsāṇā suddhasakkharā suddhakaṭhalā suddhamarumbā suddhavālikā appapaṁsukā appamattikā, yebhuyyenapāsāṇā, yebhuyyenasakkharā, yebhuyyenakaṭhalā, yebhuyyenamarumbā, yebhuyyenavālikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">just stones, just pebbles, just potsherds, just gravel, just sand, with little soil, with little clay; mostly stones, mostly pebbles, mostly potsherds, mostly gravel, mostly sand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daḍḍhāpi vuccati ajātā pathavī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is burnt, it is also called “unproductive earth”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi paṁsupuñjo vā mattikāpuñjo vā omakacātumāsaṁ ovaṭṭho, ayampi vuccati ajātā pathavī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A pile of soil or a pile that has been rained on for less than four months—this too is called “unproductive earth”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khaṇeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Digs: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ khaṇati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he digs it himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khaṇāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has dug: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks another, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇatto bahukampi khaṇati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he only asks once, then even if the other digs a lot, he commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathaviyā pathavisaññī khaṇati vā khaṇāpeti vā, bhindati vā bhedāpeti vā, dahati vā dahāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is earth, and he perceives it as such, and he digs it or has it dug, or he breaks it or has it broken, or he burns it or has it burnt, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathaviyā vematiko khaṇati vā khaṇāpeti vā, bhindati vā bhedāpeti vā, dahati vā dahāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is earth, but he is unsure of it, and he digs it or has it dug, or he breaks it or has it broken, or he burns it or has it burnt, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathaviyā apathavisaññī khaṇati vā khaṇāpeti vā, bhindati vā bhedāpeti vā, dahati vā dahāpeti vā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is earth, but he does not perceive it as such, and he digs it or has it dug, or he breaks it or has it broken, or he burns it or has it burnt, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apathaviyā pathavisaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not earth, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apathaviyā vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not earth, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apathaviyā apathavisaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not earth, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ jāna, imaṁ dehi, imaṁ āhara, iminā attho, imaṁ kappiyaṁ karohī”ti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he says, “Consider this,” “Give this,” “Bring this,” “There’s need for this,” “Make this allowable;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathavīkhaṇanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on digging the earth, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādavaggo paṭhamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first sub-chapter on lying is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musā omasapesuññaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Falsely, abusive, and malicious talebearing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padaseyyāya ve duve;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Memorizing, and two on beds; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra viññunā bhūtā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except with one who understands, true, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duṭṭhullāpatti khaṇanāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Grave offense, digging.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
