<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pd1_root-pli-ms.j. Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">1. Paṭhamapāṭidesanīyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">1. The first training rule on acknowledgment </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho panāyasmanto cattāro pāṭidesanīyā dhammā uddesaṁ āgacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerables, these four rules on acknowledgment come up for recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī sāvatthiyaṁ piṇḍāya caritvā paṭikkamanakāle aññataraṁ bhikkhuṁ passitvā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain nun was returning from almsround in Sāvatthī. She saw a monk and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handāyya, bhikkhaṁ paṭiggaṇhā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Here, Venerable, please take some almsfood.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṭṭhu, bhaginī”ti sabbeva aggahesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “Alright, Sister,” he took everything. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā upakaṭṭhe kāle nāsakkhi piṇḍāya carituṁ, chinnabhattā ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But because the time for eating was coming to an end, she was not able to go for alms, and she missed her meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī dutiyampi divasaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The next day </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi divasaṁ sāvatthiyaṁ piṇḍāya caritvā paṭikkamanakāle taṁ bhikkhuṁ passitvā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the following day the same thing happened again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handāyya, bhikkhaṁ paṭiggaṇhā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṭṭhu, bhaginī”ti sabbeva aggahesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā upakaṭṭhe kāle nāsakkhi piṇḍāya carituṁ, chinnabhattā ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī catutthe divase rathikāya pavedhentī gacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On the fourth day that nun was walking along a street, trembling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seṭṭhi gahapati rathena paṭipathaṁ āgacchanto taṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A wealthy merchant coming by carriage in the opposite direction saw her and shouted out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“apehāyye”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Watch out, Venerable!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā vokkamantī tattheva paripati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As she stepped aside, she collapsed right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seṭṭhi gahapati taṁ bhikkhuniṁ khamāpesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the merchant asked her for forgiveness: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“khamāhāyye, mayāsi pātitā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Forgive me, Venerable, since you fell because of me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṁ, gahapati, tayā pātitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I didn’t fall because of you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca ahameva dubbalā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but because I’m weak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kissa pana tvaṁ, ayye, dubbalā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But why are you so weak?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī seṭṭhissa gahapatissa etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seṭṭhi gahapati taṁ bhikkhuniṁ gharaṁ netvā bhojetvā ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then brought her to his house and gave her a meal. Afterwards he complained and criticized the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhadantā bhikkhuniyā hatthato āmisaṁ paṭiggahessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the venerables receive food directly from a nun? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kicchalābho mātugāmo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s difficult for women to get material support.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa seṭṭhissa gahapatissa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that merchant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized that monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu bhikkhuniyā hatthato āmisaṁ paṭiggahessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a monk receive food directly from a nun?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, bhikkhuniyā hatthato āmisaṁ paṭiggahesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ñātikā te, bhikkhu, aññātikā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is she a relative of yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātikā, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātako, moghapurisa, aññātikāya na jānāti patirūpaṁ vā appatirūpaṁ vā santaṁ vā asantaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, a man and a woman who are unrelated don’t know what’s appropriate and inappropriate, what’s good and bad, in dealing with each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, aññātikāya bhikkhuniyā hatthato āmisaṁ paṭiggahessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu aññātikāya bhikkhuniyā antaragharaṁ paviṭṭhāya hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, paṭidesetabbaṁ tena bhikkhunā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk receives fresh or cooked food directly from an unrelated nun who has entered an inhabited area, and then eats it, he must acknowledge it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gārayhaṁ, āvuso, dhammaṁ āpajjiṁ asappāyaṁ pāṭidesanīyaṁ, taṁ paṭidesemī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have done a blameworthy and unsuitable thing that is to be acknowledged. I acknowledge it.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unrelated: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātito vā pitito vā yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā asambaddhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who is not a descendant of one’s male ancestors going back seven generations, either on the mother’s side or on the father’s side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antaragharaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An inhabited area: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rathikā byūhaṁ siṅghāṭakaṁ gharaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a street, a cul-de-sac, an intersection, a house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, the post-midday tonics, the seven-day tonics, and the lifetime tonics, the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives the food with the intention of eating it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī antaragharaṁ paviṭṭhāya hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he receives fresh or cooked food directly from her when she has entered an inhabited area, and then eats it, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya vematiko antaragharaṁ paviṭṭhāya hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated, but he is unsure of it, and he receives fresh or cooked food directly from her when she has entered an inhabited area, and then eats it, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya ñātikasaññī antaragharaṁ paviṭṭhāya hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated, but he perceives her as related, and he receives fresh or cooked food directly from her when she has entered an inhabited area, and then eats it, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ āhāratthāya paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics for the purpose of food, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoupasampannāya hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives fresh or cooked food, with the intention of eating it, directly from a nun who is fully ordained only on one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya aññātikasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related, but he perceives her as unrelated, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya ñātikasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related, and he perceives her as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is related; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāpeti na deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has someone else give it and does not give herself; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanikkhipitvā deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives by placing it near; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antarārāme,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is inside a monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunupassaye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is at the dwelling place of nuns; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">titthiyaseyyāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is at the dwelling place of the monastics of another religion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭikkamane,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is on returning to the monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāmato nīharitvā deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives after carrying it out of the village; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ “sati paccaye paribhuñjā”ti deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics, saying, “Use these when there’s a reason;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhamānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a trainee nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇeriyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a novice nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamapāṭidesanīyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first training rule on acknowledgment is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
