<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.248-257-248–257  - 248–257 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.248-257. 248–257  - 248–257 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Chaṭṭhavagga  - 19. Sixth </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, mama sāvakānaṃ upāsakānaṃ paṭhamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchantānaṃ yadidaṃ tapussabhallikā vāṇijā. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The foremost of my laymen in first going for refuge are the merchants Tapussa and Bhallika. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Dāyakānaṃ yadidaṃ sudatto gahapati anāthapiṇḍiko. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… as a donor is the householder Sudatta Anāthapiṇḍika. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Dhammakathikānaṃ yadidaṃ citto gahapati macchikāsaṇḍiko. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who speak on the teaching is the householder Citta Macchikāsaṇḍika. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Catūhi saṅgahavatthūhi parisaṃ saṅgaṇhantānaṃ yadidaṃ hatthako āḷavako. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who attract a congregation by the four ways of being inclusive is Hatthaka Āḷavaka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Paṇītadāyakānaṃ yadidaṃ mahānāmo sakko. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who donate fine things is Mahānāma Sakka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Manāpadāyakānaṃ yadidaṃ uggo gahapati vesāliko. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who donate nice things is the householder Ugga of Vesālī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Saṅghupaṭṭhākānaṃ yadidaṃ hatthigāmako uggato gahapati. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who attend on the Saṅgha is the householder Uggata of Hatthi Village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Aveccappasannānaṃ yadidaṃ sūrambaṭṭho. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who have experiential confidence is Sūrambaṭṭha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Puggalappasannānaṃ yadidaṃ jīvako komārabhacco. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who have confidence in a person is Jīvaka Komārabhacca. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Vissāsakānaṃ yadidaṃ nakulapitā gahapatī”ti. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who are intimate is the householder Nakula’s father.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaggo chaṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
