<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.287-295-287  - 287 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.287-295. 287  - 287 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">23. Tatiyavagga  - 23. Third </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ kāyasucaritassa aniṭṭho akanto amanāpo vipāko nibbatteyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from good bodily conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ kāyasucaritassa iṭṭho kanto manāpo vipāko nibbatteyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from good bodily conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">288–289 </span></p>
<p class="p3">288–289 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ vacīsucaritassa … pe … manosucaritassa aniṭṭho akanto amanāpo vipāko nibbatteyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from good verbal … good mental conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ manosucaritassa iṭṭho kanto manāpo vipāko nibbatteyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from good verbal … good mental conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">290 </span></p>
<p class="p3">290 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ kāyaduccaritasamaṅgī tannidānā tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjeyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has engaged in bad bodily conduct, could for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ kāyaduccaritasamaṅgī tannidānā tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible that someone who has engaged in bad bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">291–292 </span></p>
<p class="p3">291–292 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ vacīduccaritasamaṅgī … pe … yaṃ manoduccaritasamaṅgī tannidānā tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjeyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has engaged in bad verbal … bad mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ manoduccaritasamaṅgī tannidānā tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible that someone who has engaged in bad verbal … bad mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">293 </span></p>
<p class="p3">293 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ kāyasucaritasamaṅgī tannidānā tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjeyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has engaged in good bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, the underworld, a lower realm, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ kāyasucaritasamaṅgī tannidānā tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible that someone who has engaged in good bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">294–295 </span></p>
<p class="p3">294–295 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ vacīsucaritasamaṅgī … pe … yaṃ manosucaritasamaṅgī tannidānā tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjeyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has engaged in good verbal … good mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ manosucaritasamaṅgī tannidānā tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible that someone who has engaged in good verbal … good mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, heavenly realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhānapāḷi niṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
