<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.061-70-61  - 61 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.061-70. 61  - 61 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Vīriyārambhādivagga  - 7. Arousing Energy </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā akusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, vīriyārambho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like arousing energy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraddhavīriyassa, bhikkhave, anuppannā ceva kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca akusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’re energetic, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">62 </span></p>
<p class="p3">62 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā kusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, mahicchatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like having many wishes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahicchassa, bhikkhave, anuppannā ceva akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca kusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you have many wishes, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">63 </span></p>
<p class="p3">63 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā akusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, appicchatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like having few wishes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appicchassa, bhikkhave, anuppannā ceva kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca akusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you have few wishes, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">64 </span></p>
<p class="p3">64 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā kusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, asantuṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like lack of contentment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asantuṭṭhassa, bhikkhave, anuppannā ceva akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca kusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you lack contentment, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">65 </span></p>
<p class="p3">65 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā akusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, santuṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like contentment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santuṭṭhassa, bhikkhave, anuppannā ceva kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca akusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’re contented, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">66 </span></p>
<p class="p3">66 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā kusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, ayonisomanasikāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like improper attention. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayoniso, bhikkhave, manasi karoto anuppannā ceva akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca kusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you attend improperly, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">67 </span></p>
<p class="p3">67 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā akusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, yonisomanasikāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like proper attention. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yoniso, bhikkhave, manasi karoto anuppannā ceva kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca akusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you attend properly, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">68 </span></p>
<p class="p3">68 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā kusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, asampajaññaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like lack of situational awareness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asampajānassa, bhikkhave, anuppannā ceva akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca kusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you lack situational awareness, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">69 </span></p>
<p class="p3">69 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā akusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, sampajaññaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like situational awareness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sampajānassa, bhikkhave, anuppannā ceva kusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca akusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you have situational awareness, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">70 </span></p>
<p class="p3">70 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yena anuppannā vā akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā vā kusalā dhammā parihāyanti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, pāpamittatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like bad friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāpamittassa, bhikkhave, anuppannā ceva akusalā dhammā uppajjanti uppannā ca kusalā dhammā parihāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you have bad friends, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyārambhādivaggo sattamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
