<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.616-627-616  - 616 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.616-627. 616  - 616 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">31. Amatavagga  - 31. The Deathless </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ te, bhikkhave, na paribhuñjanti ye kāyagatāsatiṃ na paribhuñjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who don’t enjoy mindfulness of the body don’t enjoy the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ te, bhikkhave, paribhuñjanti ye kāyagatāsatiṃ paribhuñjantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who enjoy mindfulness of the body enjoy the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">617 </span></p>
<p class="p3">617 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, aparibhuttaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati aparibhuttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who haven’t enjoyed mindfulness of the body haven’t enjoyed the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, paribhuttaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati paribhuttā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have enjoyed mindfulness of the body have enjoyed the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">618 </span></p>
<p class="p3">618 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, parihīnaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati parihīnā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who have lost mindfulness of the body have lost the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, aparihīnaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati aparihīnā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who haven’t lost mindfulness of the body haven’t lost the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">619 </span></p>
<p class="p3">619 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, viraddhaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati viraddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who have missed out on mindfulness of the body have missed out on the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, āraddhaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati āraddhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have undertaken mindfulness of the body have not missed out on the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">620 </span></p>
<p class="p3">620 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ te, bhikkhave, pamādiṃsu ye kāyagatāsatiṃ pamādiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who have neglected mindfulness of the body have neglected the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ te, bhikkhave, na pamādiṃsu ye kāyagatāsatiṃ na pamādiṃsu”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have not neglected mindfulness of the body have not neglected the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">621 </span></p>
<p class="p3">621 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, pamuṭṭhaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati pamuṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who have forgotten mindfulness of the body have forgotten the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, appamuṭṭhaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati appamuṭṭhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who haven’t forgotten mindfulness of the body haven’t forgotten the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">622 </span></p>
<p class="p3">622 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, anāsevitaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati anāsevitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who haven’t cultivated mindfulness of the body haven’t cultivated the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, āsevitaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati āsevitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have cultivated mindfulness of the body have cultivated the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">623 </span></p>
<p class="p3">623 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, abhāvitaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati abhāvitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who haven’t developed mindfulness of the body haven’t developed the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvitaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati bhāvitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have developed mindfulness of the body have developed the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">624 </span></p>
<p class="p3">624 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, abahulīkataṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati abahulīkatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who haven’t practiced mindfulness of the body haven’t practiced the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, bahulīkataṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati bahulīkatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have practiced mindfulness of the body have practiced the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">625 </span></p>
<p class="p3">625 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, anabhiññātaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati anabhiññātā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who haven’t had insight into mindfulness of the body haven’t had insight into the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, abhiññātaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati abhiññātā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have had insight into mindfulness of the body have had insight into the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">626 </span></p>
<p class="p3">626 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, apariññātaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati apariññātā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who haven’t completely understood mindfulness of the body haven’t completely understood the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, pariññātaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati pariññātā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have completely understood mindfulness of the body have completely understood the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">627 </span></p>
<p class="p3">627 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, asacchikataṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati asacchikatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who haven’t realized mindfulness of the body haven’t realized the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, sacchikataṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati sacchikatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have realized mindfulness of the body have realized the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">( … ) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The thousand discourses of the Ones are completed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Amatavaggo.) </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakanipātapāḷi niṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Book of the Ones is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
