<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.056-56. Palokasutta  - 56. Falling Apart </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.056. 56. Palokasutta  - 56. Falling Apart </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 6. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇamahāsālo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so brāhmaṇamahāsālo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a well-to-do Brahmin went up to the Buddha, and seated to one side he said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bho gotama, pubbakānaṃ brāhmaṇānaṃ vuddhānaṃ mahallakānaṃ ācariyapācariyānaṃ bhāsamānānaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, I have heard that brahmins of the past who were elderly and senior, the teachers of teachers, said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pubbe sudaṃ ayaṃ loko avīci maññe phuṭo ahosi manussehi, kukkuṭasaṃpātikā gāmanigamarājadhāniyo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In the old days this world was as crowded as hell, just full of people. The villages, towns and capital cities were no more than a chicken’s flight apart.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko nu kho, bho gotama, hetu ko paccayo yenetarahi manussānaṃ khayo hoti, tanuttaṃ paññāyati, gāmāpi agāmā honti, nigamāpi anigamā honti, nagarāpi anagarā honti, janapadāpi ajanapadā hontī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled, a decline in population is evident, and whole villages, towns, cities, and countries have disappeared?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etarahi, brāhmaṇa, manussā adhammarāgarattā visamalobhābhibhūtā micchādhammaparetā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These days, brahmin, humans just love illicit desire. They’re overcome by immoral greed, and mired in wrong thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te adhammarāgarattā visamalobhābhibhūtā micchādhammaparetā tiṇhāni satthāni gahetvā aññamaññaṃ jīvitā voropenti, tena bahū manussā kālaṃ karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking up sharp knives, they murder each other. And so many people perish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, brāhmaṇa, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yenetarahi manussānaṃ khayo hoti, tanuttaṃ paññāyati, gāmāpi agāmā honti, nigamāpi anigamā honti, nagarāpi anagarā honti, janapadāpi ajanapadā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, brāhmaṇa, etarahi manussā adhammarāgarattā visamalobhābhibhūtā micchādhammaparetā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ adhammarāgarattānaṃ visamalobhābhibhūtānaṃ micchādhammaparetānaṃ devo na sammādhāraṃ anuppavecchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the heavens don’t provide enough rain, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena dubbhikkhaṃ hoti dussassaṃ setaṭṭhikaṃ salākāvuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so there’s famine, a bad harvest, with blighted crops that turn to straw. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bahū manussā kālaṃ karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so many people perish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, brāhmaṇa, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yenetarahi manussānaṃ khayo hoti, tanuttaṃ paññāyati, gāmāpi agāmā honti, nigamāpi anigamā honti, nagarāpi anagarā honti, janapadāpi ajanapadā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, brāhmaṇa, etarahi manussā adhammarāgarattā visamalobhābhibhūtā micchādhammaparetā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ adhammarāgarattānaṃ visamalobhābhibhūtānaṃ micchādhammaparetānaṃ yakkhā vāḷe amanusse ossajjanti, tena bahū manussā kālaṃ karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">native spirits let vicious monsters loose. And so many people perish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, brāhmaṇa, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yenetarahi manussānaṃ khayo hoti, tanuttaṃ paññāyati, gāmāpi agāmā honti, nigamāpi anigamā honti, nagarāpi anagarā honti, janapadāpi ajanapadā hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
