<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.035-35. Hatthakasutta  - 35. With Hatthaka </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.035. 35. Hatthakasutta  - 35. With Hatthaka </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Devadūtavagga  - 4. Messengers of the Gods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā āḷaviyaṃ viharati gomagge siṃsapāvane paṇṇasanthare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Āḷavī, on a mat of leaves by a cow-path in a grove of Indian Rosewood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho hatthako āḷavako jaṅghāvihāraṃ anucaṅkamamāno anuvicaramāno addasa bhagavantaṃ gomagge siṃsapāvane paṇṇasanthare nisinnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then as Hatthaka of Āḷavī was going for a walk he saw the Buddha sitting on that mat of leaves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho hatthako āḷavako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, bhante bhagavā, sukhamasayitthā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I trust the Buddha slept well?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, kumāra, sukhamasayitthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, prince, I slept well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca pana loke sukhaṃ senti, ahaṃ tesaṃ aññataro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am one of those who sleep well in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sītā, bhante, hemantikā ratti, antaraṭṭhako himapātasamayo, kharā gokaṇṭakahatā bhūmi, tanuko paṇṇasantharo, viraḷāni rukkhassa pattāni, sītāni kāsāyāni vatthāni, sīto ca verambho vāto vāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The winter nights are cold, sir, and it’s the week of mid-winter, when the snow falls. Rough is the ground trampled under the cows’ hooves, and thin is the mat of leaves. The leaves are sparse on the trees, the ocher robes are cold, and cold blows the north wind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ca pana bhagavā evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And yet the Buddha says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃ, kumāra, sukhamasayitthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Yes, prince, I slept well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca pana loke sukhaṃ senti, ahaṃ tesaṃ aññataro’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am one of those who sleep well in the world.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, kumāra, taññevettha paṭipucchissāmi. Yathā te khameyya tathā naṃ byākareyyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, prince, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, kumāra, idhassa gahapatissa vā gahapatiputtassa vā kūṭāgāraṃ ullittāvalittaṃ nivātaṃ phusitaggaḷaṃ pihitavātapānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think? Take the case of a householder or his son, who lives in a bungalow, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with latches fastened and windows shuttered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrassa pallaṅko gonakatthato paṭikatthato paṭalikatthato kadalimigapavarapaccattharaṇo sauttaracchado ubhato lohitakūpadhāno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">His couch is spread with woolen covers—shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers—and spread with a fine deer hide. It has a canopy above and red pillows at both ends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">telappadīpo cettha jhāyeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An oil lamp is burning there, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catasso ca pajāpatiyo manāpāmanāpena paccupaṭṭhitā assu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while his four wives attend to him in all manner of agreeable ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, kumāra, sukhaṃ vā so sayeyya no vā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, prince, would he sleep well, or not? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ vā te ettha hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or how do you see this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sukhaṃ so, bhante, sayeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He would sleep well, sir. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca pana loke sukhaṃ senti, so tesaṃ aññataro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of those who sleep well in the world, he would be one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, kumāra, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, prince? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api nu tassa gahapatissa vā gahapatiputtassa vā uppajjeyyuṃ rāgajā pariḷāhā kāyikā vā cetasikā vā yehi so rāgajehi pariḷāhehi pariḍayhamāno dukkhaṃ sayeyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is it not possible that a fever born of greed—physical or mental—might arise in that householder or householder’s son, burning him so he sleeps badly?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yehi kho so, kumāra, gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā rāgajehi pariḷāhehi pariḍayhamāno dukkhaṃ sayeyya, so rāgo tathāgatassa pahīno ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The greed that burns that householder or householder’s son, making them sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmāhaṃ sukhamasayitthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I sleep well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, kumāra, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, prince? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api nu tassa gahapatissa vā gahapatiputtassa vā uppajjeyyuṃ dosajā pariḷāhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is it not possible that a fever born of hate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mohajā pariḷāhā kāyikā vā cetasikā vā yehi so mohajehi pariḷāhehi pariḍayhamāno dukkhaṃ sayeyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">or a fever born of delusion—physical or mental—might arise in that householder or householder’s son, burning him so he sleeps badly?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye hi kho so, kumāra, gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā mohajehi pariḷāhehi pariḍayhamāno dukkhaṃ sayeyya, so moho tathāgatassa pahīno ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The delusion that burns that householder or householder’s son, making them sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmāhaṃ sukhamasayitthanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I sleep well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbadā ve sukhaṃ seti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A brahmin who is fully extinguished </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brāhmaṇo parinibbuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">always sleeps well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo na limpati kāmesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual pleasures slide off them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sītibhūto nirūpadhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re cooled, free of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbā āsattiyo chetvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since they’ve cut off all clinging, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vineyya hadaye daraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and removed the stress from the heart, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasanto sukhaṃ seti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the peaceful sleep well, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santiṃ pappuyya cetaso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">abiding in peace of mind.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
