<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.088-88. Tatiyasikkhāsutta  - 88. Training (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.088. 88. Tatiyasikkhāsutta  - 88. Training (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Samaṇavagga  - 9. Ascetics </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhikamidaṃ, bhikkhave, diyaḍḍhasikkhāpadasataṃ anvaddhamāsaṃ uddesaṃ āgacchati yattha attakāmā kulaputtā sikkhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come up for recitation, in which gentlemen who love themselves train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tisso imā, bhikkhave, sikkhā yatthetaṃ sabbaṃ samodhānaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are all included in the three trainings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhisīlasikkhā, adhicittasikkhā, adhipaññāsikkhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso sikkhā yatthetaṃ sabbaṃ samodhānaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three trainings that include them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlesu paripūrakārī hoti samādhismiṃ paripūrakārī paññāya paripūrakārī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yāni tāni khuddānukhuddakāni sikkhāpadāni tāni āpajjatipi vuṭṭhātipi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are restored. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi mettha, bhikkhave, abhabbatā vuttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because I don’t say they’re incapable of that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni ca kho tāni sikkhāpadāni ādibrahmacariyakāni brahmacariyasāruppāni tattha dhuvasīlo ca hoti ṭhitasīlo ca, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they’re constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā pana anabhisambhavaṃ appaṭivijjhaṃ pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā antarāparinibbāyī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished between one life and the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā pana anabhisambhavaṃ appaṭivijjhaṃ pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā upahaccaparinibbāyī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished upon landing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā pana anabhisambhavaṃ appaṭivijjhaṃ pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā asaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished without extra effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā pana anabhisambhavaṃ appaṭivijjhaṃ pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished with extra effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā pana anabhisambhavaṃ appaṭivijjhaṃ pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā uddhaṃsoto hoti akaniṭṭhagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā pana anabhisambhavaṃ appaṭivijjhaṃ tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā, rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmī hoti, sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they’re a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā pana anabhisambhavaṃ appaṭivijjhaṃ tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā ekabījī hoti, ekaṃyeva mānusakaṃ bhavaṃ nibbattetvā dukkhassantaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they’re a one-seeder. They will be reborn just one time in a human existence, then make an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā pana anabhisambhavaṃ appaṭivijjhaṃ tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā kolaṅkolo hoti, dve vā tīṇi vā kulāni sandhāvitvā saṃsaritvā dukkhassantaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they go family to family. They will transmigrate between two or three families and then make an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā pana anabhisambhavaṃ appaṭivijjhaṃ tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sattakkhattuparamo hoti, sattakkhattuparamaṃ deve ca manusse ca sandhāvitvā saṃsaritvā dukkhassantaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they have at most seven rebirths. They will transmigrate at most seven times among gods and humans and then make an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, paripūraṃ paripūrakārī ārādheti padesaṃ padesakārī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, mendicants, if you practice partially you succeed partially. If you practice fully you succeed fully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avañjhāni tvevāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sikkhāpadāni vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These training rules are not a waste, I say.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
