<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.042-42. Tiṭhānasutta  - 42. Three Grounds </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.042. 42. Tiṭhānasutta  - 42. Three Grounds </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Cūḷavagga  - 5. The Lesser Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, ṭhānehi saddho pasanno veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are three grounds, mendicants, by which a person with faith and confidence can be known. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavantānaṃ dassanakāmo hoti, saddhammaṃ sotukāmo hoti, vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati muttacāgo payatapāṇi vossaggarato yācayogo dānasaṃvibhāgarato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They like to see ethical people. They like to hear the true teaching. And they live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi ṭhānehi saddho pasanno veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three grounds by which a person with faith and confidence can be known. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanakāmo sīlavataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They like to see ethical people; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammaṃ sotumicchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they want to hear the true teaching; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vinaye maccheramalaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve driven out the stain of stinginess: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sa ve saddhoti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who’s called a person of faith.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
