<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.033-33. Sāriputtasutta  - 33. With Sāriputta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.033. 33. Sāriputtasutta  - 33. With Sāriputta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Devadūtavagga  - 4. Messengers of the Gods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅkhittenapi kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, dhammaṃ deseyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Maybe I’ll teach Dhamma in brief, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitthārenapi kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, dhammaṃ deseyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">maybe in detail, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhittavitthārenapi kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, dhammaṃ deseyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">maybe both in brief and in detail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññātāro ca dullabhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it’s hard to find anyone who understands.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etassa, bhagavā, kālo, etassa, sugata, kālo </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ bhagavā saṅkhittenapi dhammaṃ deseyya, vitthārenapi dhammaṃ deseyya, saṅkhittavitthārenapi dhammaṃ deseyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let the Buddha teach Dhamma in brief, in detail, and both in brief and in detail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavissanti dhammassa aññātāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There will be those who understand the teaching!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātiha, sāriputta, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, Sāriputta, you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na bhavissanti, bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na bhavissanti, yañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja viharato ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na honti tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja viharissāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There’ll be no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and we’ll live having achieved the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where ego, possessiveness, and underlying tendency to conceit are no more.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi kho, sāriputta, sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, sāriputta, bhikkhuno imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na honti, bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na honti, yañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja viharato ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na honti tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and they live having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where ego, possessiveness, and underlying tendency to conceit are no more—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, sāriputta: </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhikkhu acchecchi taṇhaṃ, vivattayi saṃyojanaṃ, sammā mānābhisamayā antamakāsi dukkhassa’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a mendicant who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idañca pana metaṃ, sāriputta, sandhāya bhāsitaṃ pārāyane udayapañhe: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Sāriputta, this is what I was referring to in ‘The Way to the Beyond’, in ‘The Questions of Udaya’ when I said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Pahānaṃ kāmasaññānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The abandoning of both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">domanassāna cūbhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">sensual perceptions and aversion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thinassa ca panūdanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the dispelling of dullness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuccānaṃ nivāraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the cessation of remorse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upekkhāsatisaṃsuddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pure equanimity and mindfulness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammatakkapurejavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">preceded by investigation of principles—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāvimokkhaṃ pabrūmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">this, I declare, is liberation by enlightenment, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjāya pabhedanan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the smashing of ignorance.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
