<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.141-141. Assaparassasutta  - 141. Excellent Horses </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.141. 141. Assaparassasutta  - 141. Excellent Horses </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Yodhājīvavagga  - 14. A Warrior </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayo ca, bhikkhave, assaparasse desessāmi tayo ca purisaparasse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the three excellent horses and the three excellent people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katame ca, bhikkhave, tayo assaparassā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What are the three excellent horses? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco assaparasso javasampanno hoti; na vaṇṇasampanno na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One excellent horse is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco assaparasso javasampanno hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca; na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Another excellent horse is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco assaparasso javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While another excellent horse is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo assaparassā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three excellent horses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, tayo purisaparassā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What are the three excellent people? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco purisaparasso javasampanno hoti; na vaṇṇasampanno na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One excellent person is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco purisaparasso javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca; na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Another excellent person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco purisaparasso javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While another excellent person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, purisaparasso javasampanno hoti; na vaṇṇasampanno, na ārohapariṇāhasampanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is an excellent person fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko hoti tattha parinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa javasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re fast, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhidhamme kho pana abhivinaye pañhaṃ puṭṭho saṃsādeti, no vissajjeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when asked a question about the teaching or training, they falter without answering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa na vaṇṇasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re not beautiful, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho pana lābhī hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they don’t receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa na ārohapariṇāhasmiṃ vadāmi. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, purisaparasso javasampanno hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re not well proportioned, I say. This is how an excellent person is fast, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vaṇṇasampanno, na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but not beautiful or well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, purisaparasso javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca, na ārohapariṇāhasampanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is an excellent person fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko hoti tattha parinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa javasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re fast, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhidhamme kho pana abhivinaye pañhaṃ puṭṭho vissajjeti, no saṃsādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa vaṇṇasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re beautiful, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho pana lābhī hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa na ārohapariṇāhasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re not well proportioned, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, purisaparasso javasampanno ca hoti; vaṇṇasampanno ca, na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how an excellent person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, purisaparasso javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is an excellent person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko hoti tattha parinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa javasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re fast, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhidhamme kho pana abhivinaye pañhaṃ puṭṭho vissajjeti, no saṃsādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa vaṇṇasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re beautiful, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhī kho pana hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa ārohapariṇāhasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re well proportioned, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, purisaparasso javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how an excellent person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo purisaparassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three excellent people.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
