<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.001-1. Bhayasutta  - 1. Perils </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.001. 1. Bhayasutta  - 1. Perils </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bālavagga  - 1. Fools </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kānici, bhikkhave, bhayāni uppajjanti sabbāni tāni bālato uppajjanti, no paṇḍitato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci upaddavā uppajjanti sabbe te bālato uppajjanti, no paṇḍitato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci upasaggā uppajjanti sabbe te bālato uppajjanti, no paṇḍitato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, naḷāgārā vā tiṇāgārā vā aggi mutto kūṭāgārānipi ḍahati ullittāvalittāni nivātāni phusitaggaḷāni pihitavātapānāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a fire that spreads from a hut made of reeds or grass, and burns down even a bungalow, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with latches fastened and windows shuttered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yāni kānici bhayāni uppajjanti sabbāni tāni bālato uppajjanti, no paṇḍitato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci upaddavā uppajjanti sabbe te bālato uppajjanti, no paṇḍitato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci upasaggā uppajjanti sabbe te bālato uppajjanti, no paṇḍitato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, sappaṭibhayo bālo, appaṭibhayo paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, the fool is dangerous, but the astute person is safe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saupaddavo bālo, anupaddavo paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fool is perilous, but the astute person is not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saupasaggo bālo, anupasaggo paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fool is hazardous, but the astute person is not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi, bhikkhave, paṇḍitato bhayaṃ, natthi paṇḍitato upaddavo, natthi paṇḍitato upasaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s no danger, peril, or hazard that comes from the astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yehi tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bālo veditabbo te tayo dhamme abhinivajjetvā, yehi tīhi dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito veditabbo te tayo dhamme samādāya vattissāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will reject the three things by which a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three things by which an astute person is known.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
