<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.047-47. Saṅkhatalakkhaṇasutta  - 47. Characteristics of the Conditioned </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.047. 47. Saṅkhatalakkhaṇasutta  - 47. Characteristics of the Conditioned </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Cūḷavagga  - 5. The Lesser Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, saṅkhatassa saṅkhatalakkhaṇāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, conditioned phenomena have these three characteristics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppādo paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi saṅkhatassa saṅkhatalakkhaṇānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three characteristics of conditioned phenomena.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṅkhatalakkhaṇasutta </span></p>
<p class="p3">Characteristics of the Unconditioned </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, asaṅkhatassa asaṅkhatalakkhaṇāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Unconditioned phenomena have these three characteristics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na uppādo paññāyati, na vayo paññāyati, na ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No arising is evident, no vanishing is evident, and no change while persisting is evident. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi asaṅkhatassa asaṅkhatalakkhaṇānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three characteristics of unconditioned phenomena.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
