<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.123-123. Kusinārasutta  - 123. At Kusināra </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.123. 123. Kusinārasutta  - 123. At Kusināra </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Kusināravagga  - 13. Kusināra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kusinārāyaṃ viharati baliharaṇe vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kusināra, in the Forest of Offerings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu aññataraṃ gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā upanissāya viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, take the case of a mendicant living supported by a town or village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā upasaṅkamitvā svātanāya bhattena nimanteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder or their child approaches and invites them for the next day’s meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkhamāno, bhikkhave, bhikkhu adhivāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mendicant accepts if they want. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassā rattiyā accayena pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena tassa gahapatissa vā gahapatiputtassa vā nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkamati; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the night has passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl and robe, and approach that householder’s home, where they sit on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ so gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappeti sampavāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The householder or their child serves and satisfies them with their own hands with a variety of delicious foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mendicant thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhu vata myāyaṃ gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappeti sampavāretī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s so good that this householder serves me with a variety of delicious foods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampissa hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vata māyaṃ gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā āyatimpi evarūpena paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappeyya sampavāreyyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I really hope this householder serves me with a variety of delicious foods in the future, too.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ piṇḍapātaṃ gathito mucchito ajjhosanno anādīnavadassāvī anissaraṇapañño paribhuñjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat that food tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha kāmavitakkampi vitakketi, byāpādavitakkampi vitakketi, vihiṃsāvitakkampi vitakketi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think about it with sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno dinnaṃ na mahapphalanti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A gift to such a mendicant is not very fruitful, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamatto hi, bhikkhave, bhikkhu viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because that mendicant is negligent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhu aññataraṃ gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā upanissāya viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another case of a mendicant living supported by a town or village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā upasaṅkamitvā svātanāya bhattena nimanteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder or their child approaches and invites them for the next day’s meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkhamāno, bhikkhave, bhikkhu adhivāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mendicant accepts if they want. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassā rattiyā accayena pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena tassa gahapatissa vā gahapatiputtassa vā nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkamati; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the night has passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl and robe, and approach that householder’s home, where they sit on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ so gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappeti sampavāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The householder or their child serves and satisfies them with their own hands with a variety of delicious foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It never occurs to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhu vata myāyaṃ gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappeti sampavāretī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s so good that the householder or their child serves and satisfies me with their own hands with a variety of delicious foods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampissa na hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vata māyaṃ gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā āyatimpi evarūpena paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappeyya sampavāreyyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I really hope this householder serves me with a variety of delicious foods in the future, too.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ piṇḍapātaṃ agathito amucchito anajjhosanno ādīnavadassāvī nissaraṇapañño paribhuñjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat that alms-food untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawback, and understanding the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha nekkhammavitakkampi vitakketi, abyāpādavitakkampi vitakketi, avihiṃsāvitakkampi vitakketi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think about it with thoughts of renunciation, good will, or harmlessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno dinnaṃ mahapphalanti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A gift to such a mendicant is very fruitful, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamatto hi, bhikkhave, bhikkhu viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because that mendicant is diligent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
