<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.132-132. Lekhasutta  - 132. Etchings </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.132. 132. Lekhasutta  - 132. Etchings </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Kusināravagga  - 13. Kusināra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāsāṇalekhūpamo puggalo, pathavilekhūpamo puggalo, udakalekhūpamo puggalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person like a line drawn in stone, a person like a line drawn in sand, and a person like a line drawn in water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pāsāṇalekhūpamo puggalo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the person like a line drawn in stone? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo abhiṇhaṃ kujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who is often angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca khvassa kodho dīgharattaṃ anuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their anger lingers for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, pāsāṇe lekhā na khippaṃ lujjati vātena vā udakena vā, ciraṭṭhitikā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a line drawn in stone, which isn’t quickly worn away by wind and water, but lasts for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco puggalo abhiṇhaṃ kujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, this person is often angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca khvassa kodho dīgharattaṃ anuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their anger lingers for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāsāṇalekhūpamo puggalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person like a line drawn in stone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pathavilekhūpamo puggalo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the person like a line drawn in sand? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo abhiṇhaṃ kujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who is often angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca khvassa kodho na dīgharattaṃ anuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but their anger doesn’t linger long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, pathaviyā lekhā khippaṃ lujjati vātena vā udakena vā, na ciraṭṭhitikā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a line drawn in sand, which is quickly worn away by wind and water, and doesn’t last long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco puggalo abhiṇhaṃ kujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, this person is often angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca khvassa kodho na dīgharattaṃ anuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but their anger doesn’t linger long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pathavilekhūpamo puggalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person like a line drawn in sand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, udakalekhūpamo puggalo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the person like a line drawn in water? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo āgāḷhenapi vuccamāno pharusenapi vuccamāno amanāpenapi vuccamāno sandhiyatimeva saṃsandatimeva sammodatimeva. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who, though spoken to by someone in a rough, harsh, and disagreeable manner, still stays in touch, interacts with, and greets them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, udake lekhā khippaṃyeva paṭivigacchati, na ciraṭṭhitikā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a line drawn in water, which vanishes right away, and doesn’t last long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco puggalo āgāḷhenapi vuccamāno pharusenapi vuccamāno amanāpenapi vuccamāno sandhiyatimeva saṃsandatimeva sammodatimeva. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, this person, though spoken to by someone in a rough, harsh, and disagreeable manner, still stays in touch, interacts with, and greets them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, udakalekhūpamo puggalo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person like a line drawn in water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kusināravaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kusinārabhaṇḍanā ceva, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gotamabharaṇḍuhatthako; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaṭuviyaṃ dve anuruddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭicchannaṃ lekhena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
