<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.011-11. Ñātasutta  - 11. Well-known </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.011. 11. Ñātasutta  - 11. Well-known </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rathakāravagga  - 2. The Chariot-maker </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato ñāto bhikkhu bahujanaahitāya paṭipanno hoti bahujanadukkhāya, bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a well-known mendicant who has three qualities is acting for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ananulomike kāyakamme samādapeti, ananulomike vacīkamme samādapeti, ananulomikesu dhammesu samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They encourage deeds of body and speech, as well as principles, that don’t reinforce good qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato ñāto bhikkhu bahujanaahitāya paṭipanno hoti bahujanadukkhāya, bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A well-known mendicant who has these three qualities is acting for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato ñāto bhikkhu bahujanahitāya paṭipanno hoti bahujanasukhāya, bahuno janassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A well-known mendicant who has three qualities is acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anulomike kāyakamme samādapeti, anulomike vacīkamme samādapeti, anulomikesu dhammesu samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They encourage deeds of body and speech, as well as principles, that reinforce good qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato ñāto bhikkhu bahujanahitāya paṭipanno hoti bahujanasukhāya, bahuno janassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A well-known mendicant who has these three qualities is acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
