<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.095-95. Parisāsutta  - 95. Assemblies </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.095. 95. Parisāsutta  - 95. Assemblies </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Loṇakapallavagga  - 10. A Lump of Salt </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these are the three assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggavatī parisā, vaggā parisā, samaggā parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly of the best, a divided assembly, and a harmonious assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, aggavatī parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an assembly of the best? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ therā bhikkhū na bāhulikā honti na sāthalikā, okkamane nikkhittadhurā paviveke pubbaṅgamā, vīriyaṃ ārabhanti appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya, tesaṃ pacchimā janatā diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the senior mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders. Instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. And those who come afterwards follow their example. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāpi hoti na bāhulikā na sāthalikā okkamane nikkhittadhurā paviveke pubbaṅgamā, vīriyaṃ ārabhati appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They too are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders. Instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, aggavatī parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called an assembly of the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, vaggā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a divided assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū bhaṇḍanajātā kalahajātā vivādāpannā aññamaññaṃ mukhasattīhi vitudantā viharanti, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vaggā parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants argue, quarrel, and fight, continually wounding each other with barbed words. This is called a divided assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, samaggā parisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a harmonious assembly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, yassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhikkhū samaggā sammodamānā avivadamānā khīrodakībhūtā aññamaññaṃ piyacakkhūhi sampassantā viharanti, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, samaggā parisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An assembly where the mendicants live in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. This is called a harmonious assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye bhikkhū samaggā sammodamānā avivadamānā khīrodakībhūtā aññamaññaṃ piyacakkhūhi sampassantā viharanti, bahuṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū tasmiṃ samaye puññaṃ pasavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the mendicants live in harmony like this, they make much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmaṃ, bhikkhave, vihāraṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhū viharanti, yadidaṃ muditāya cetovimuttiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the mendicants live in a holy dwelling, that is, the heart’s release by rejoicing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vediyati, sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’re joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they’re blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uparipabbate thullaphusitake deve vassante taṃ udakaṃ yathāninnaṃ pavattamānaṃ pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūreti, pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūrā kusobbhe paripūrenti, kusobbhā paripūrā mahāsobbhe paripūrenti, mahāsobbhā paripūrā kunnadiyo paripūrenti, kunnadiyo paripūrā mahānadiyo paripūrenti, mahānadiyo paripūrā samuddaṃ paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like when it rains heavily on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yasmiṃ samaye bhikkhū samaggā sammodamānā avivadamānā khīrodakībhūtā aññamaññaṃ piyacakkhūhi sampassantā viharanti, bahuṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū tasmiṃ samaye puññaṃ pasavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the mendicants are in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes, they make much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmaṃ, bhikkhave, vihāraṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhū viharanti, yadidaṃ muditāya cetovimuttiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the mendicants live in a holy dwelling, that is, the heart’s release by rejoicing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vediyati, sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’re joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they’re blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso parisā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three assemblies.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
