<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.128-128. Kaṭuviyasutta  - 128. Bitter </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.128. 128. Kaṭuviyasutta  - 128. Bitter </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Kusināravagga  - 13. Kusināra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bārāṇasiyaṃ viharati isipatane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya bārāṇasiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Benares for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā goyogapilakkhasmiṃ piṇḍāya caramāno aññataraṃ bhikkhuṃ rittassādaṃ bāhirassādaṃ muṭṭhassatiṃ asampajānaṃ asamāhitaṃ vibbhantacittaṃ pākatindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While the Buddha was walking for alms near the cow-hitching place at the wavy leaf fig, he saw a disgruntled monk who was looking for pleasure in external things, unmindful, without situational awareness or immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, attānaṃ kaṭuviyamakāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monk, don’t be bitter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vata, bhikkhu, kaṭuviyakataṃ attānaṃ āmagandhena avassutaṃ makkhikā nānupatissanti nānvāssavissantīti, netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you’re bitter, corrupted by the stench of rotting flesh, flies will, without a doubt, plague and infest you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu bhagavatā iminā ovādena ovadito saṃvegamāpādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hearing this advice of the Buddha, that monk was struck with a sense of urgency. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bārāṇasiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after the meal, on his return from alms-round, the Buddha told the mendicants what had happened. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāhaṃ, bhikkhave, pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya bārāṇasiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhikkhave, goyogapilakkhasmiṃ piṇḍāya caramāno aññataraṃ bhikkhuṃ rittassādaṃ bāhirassādaṃ muṭṭhassatiṃ asampajānaṃ asamāhitaṃ vibbhantacittaṃ pākatindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavocaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mā kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, attānaṃ kaṭuviyamakāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vata bhikkhu kaṭuviyakataṃ attānaṃ āmagandhena avassutaṃ makkhikā nānupatissanti nānvāssavissantīti, netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, so bhikkhu mayā iminā ovādena ovadito saṃvegamāpādī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu kho, bhante, kaṭuviyaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is this ‘bitterness’? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko āmagandho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the ‘stench of rotting flesh’? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā makkhikā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the ‘flies’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhijjhā kho, bhikkhu, kaṭuviyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Desire is bitterness; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">byāpādo āmagandho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">ill will is the stench of rotting flesh; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpakā akusalā vitakkā makkhikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and bad, unskillful thoughts are the flies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vata, bhikkhu, kaṭuviyakataṃ attānaṃ āmagandhena avassutaṃ makkhikā nānupatissanti nānvāssavissantīti, netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you’re bitter, corrupted by the stench of rotting flesh, flies will, without a doubt, plague and infest you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aguttaṃ cakkhusotasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When your eyes and ears are unguarded, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">indriyesu asaṃvutaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and you’re not restrained in your sense faculties, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Makkhikānupatissanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">flies—those lustful thoughts—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkappā rāganissitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">will plague you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaṭuviyakato bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who’s bitter, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmagandhe avassuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">corrupted by the stench of rotting flesh, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārakā hoti nibbānā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is far from being extinguished, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vighātasseva bhāgavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">anguish is their lot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāme vā yadi vāraññe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether in village or wilderness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aladdhā samathamattano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if they don’t find serenity in themselves, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pareti bālo dummedho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the fool, void of wisdom, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkhikāhi purakkhato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is honored only by flies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca sīlena sampannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those who have ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāyūpasameratā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">lovers of wisdom and peace, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasantā sukhaṃ senti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they, being peaceful, sleep well, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāsayitvāna makkhikā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">since they’ve got rid of the flies.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
