<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.067-67. Kathāvatthusutta  - 67. Topics of Discussion </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.067. 67. Kathāvatthusutta  - 67. Topics of Discussion </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Mahāvagga  - 7. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, kathāvatthūni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are, mendicants, these three topics of discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atītaṃ vā, bhikkhave, addhānaṃ ārabbha kathaṃ katheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You might discuss the past: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃ ahosi atītamaddhānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That is how it was in the past.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgataṃ vā, bhikkhave, addhānaṃ ārabbha kathaṃ katheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You might discuss the future: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃ bhavissati anāgatamaddhānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That is how it will be in the future.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi vā, bhikkhave, paccuppannaṃ addhānaṃ ārabbha kathaṃ katheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or you might discuss the present: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃ hoti etarahi paccuppannamaddhānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is how it is at present.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathāsampayogena, bhikkhave, puggalo veditabbo yadi vā kaccho yadi vā akacchoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion by seeing how they take part in a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo pañhaṃ puṭṭho samāno ekaṃsabyākaraṇīyaṃ pañhaṃ na ekaṃsena byākaroti, vibhajjabyākaraṇīyaṃ pañhaṃ na vibhajja byākaroti, paṭipucchābyākaraṇīyaṃ pañhaṃ na paṭipucchā byākaroti, ṭhapanīyaṃ pañhaṃ na ṭhapeti, evaṃ santāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo akaccho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is asked a question, if it needs to be answered with a generalization and they don’t answer it generally; or if it needs analysis and they answer without analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer without a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they don’t set it aside, then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace panāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo pañhaṃ puṭṭho samāno ekaṃsabyākaraṇīyaṃ pañhaṃ ekaṃsena byākaroti, vibhajjabyākaraṇīyaṃ pañhaṃ vibhajja byākaroti, paṭipucchābyākaraṇīyaṃ pañhaṃ paṭipucchā byākaroti, ṭhapanīyaṃ pañhaṃ ṭhapeti, evaṃ santāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo kaccho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is asked a question, if it needs to be answered with a generalization and they answer it generally; or if it needs analysis and they answer after analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer with a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they set it aside, then that person is competent to hold a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathāsampayogena, bhikkhave, puggalo veditabbo yadi vā kaccho yadi vā akacchoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion by seeing how they take part in a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo pañhaṃ puṭṭho samāno ṭhānāṭhāne na saṇṭhāti parikappe na saṇṭhāti aññātavāde na saṇṭhāti paṭipadāya na saṇṭhāti, evaṃ santāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo akaccho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is asked a question, if they’re not consistent about what their position is and what it isn’t; about what they propose; about speaking from what they know; and about the appropriate procedure, then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace panāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo pañhaṃ puṭṭho samāno ṭhānāṭhāne saṇṭhāti parikappe saṇṭhāti aññātavāde saṇṭhāti paṭipadāya saṇṭhāti, evaṃ santāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo kaccho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is asked a question, if they are consistent about what their position is and what it isn’t; about what they propose; about speaking from what they know; and about the appropriate procedure, then that person is competent to hold a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathāsampayogena, bhikkhave, puggalo veditabbo yadi vā kaccho yadi vā akacchoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion by seeing how they take part in a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo pañhaṃ puṭṭho samāno aññenaññaṃ paṭicarati, bahiddhā kathaṃ apanāmeti, kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti, evaṃ santāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo akaccho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is asked a question, if they dodge the issue; distract the discussion with irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace panāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo pañhaṃ puṭṭho samāno na aññenaññaṃ paṭicarati na bahiddhā kathaṃ apanāmeti, na kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti, evaṃ santāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo kaccho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is asked a question, if they don’t dodge the issue; distract the discussion with irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that person is competent to hold a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathāsampayogena, bhikkhave, puggalo veditabbo yadi vā kaccho yadi vā akacchoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion by seeing how they take part in a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo pañhaṃ puṭṭho samāno abhiharati abhimaddati anupajagghati khalitaṃ gaṇhāti, evaṃ santāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo akaccho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is asked a question, if they intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on trivial mistakes, then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace panāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo pañhaṃ puṭṭho samāno nābhiharati nābhimaddati na anupajagghati na khalitaṃ gaṇhāti, evaṃ santāyaṃ, bhikkhave, puggalo kaccho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is asked a question, if they don’t intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on trivial mistakes, then that person is competent to hold a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathāsampayogena, bhikkhave, puggalo veditabbo yadi vā saupaniso yadi vā anupanisoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can know whether or not a person has what’s required by seeing how they take part in a discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anohitasoto, bhikkhave, anupaniso hoti, ohitasoto saupaniso hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they lend an ear they have what’s required; if they don’t lend an ear they don’t have what’s required. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saupaniso samāno abhijānāti ekaṃ dhammaṃ, parijānāti ekaṃ dhammaṃ, pajahati ekaṃ dhammaṃ, sacchikaroti ekaṃ dhammaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who has what’s required directly knows one thing, completely understands one thing, gives up one thing, and realizes one thing—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So abhijānanto ekaṃ dhammaṃ, parijānanto ekaṃ dhammaṃ, pajahanto ekaṃ dhammaṃ, sacchikaronto ekaṃ dhammaṃ sammāvimuttiṃ phusati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and then they experience complete freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadatthā, bhikkhave, kathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the purpose of discussion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etadatthā mantanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">consultation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etadatthā upanisā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the requirements, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etadatthaṃ sotāvadhānaṃ, yadidaṃ anupādā cittassa vimokkhoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and listening well, that is, the liberation of the mind by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye viruddhā sallapanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who converse with hostility, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viniviṭṭhā samussitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">too sure of themselves, arrogant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anariyaguṇamāsajja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">ignoble, attacking virtues, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññoññavivaresino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they look for flaws in each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbhāsitaṃ vikkhalitaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They rejoice together when their opponent </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sampamohaṃ parājayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">speaks poorly and makes a mistake, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññoññassābhinandanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">becoming confused and defeated—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tadariyo kathanācare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but the noble ones don’t discuss like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace cassa kathākāmo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If an astute person wants to hold a discussion </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kālamaññāya paṇḍito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">connected with the teaching and its meaning—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaṭṭhapaṭisaṃyuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the kind of discussion that noble ones hold—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā ariyacaritā kathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then that wise one should start the discussion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kathaṃ kathaye dhīro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowing when the time is right, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aviruddho anussito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">neither hostile nor arrogant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anunnatena manasā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not over-excited, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apaḷāso asāhaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">contemptuous, or aggressive, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusūyāyamāno so, </span></p>
<p class="p3">or with a mind full of jealousy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammadaññāya bhāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’d speak from what they rightly know. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Subhāsitaṃ anumodeyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They agree with what was well spoken, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbhaṭṭhe nāpasādaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">without criticizing what was poorly said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upārambhaṃ na sikkheyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d not persist in finding faults, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khalitañca na gāhaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor seize on trivial mistakes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nābhihare nābhimadde, </span></p>
<p class="p3">neither intimidating nor crushing the other, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vācaṃ payutaṃ bhaṇe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor would they speak with sly implications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātatthaṃ pasādatthaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good people consult </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sataṃ ve hoti mantanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the sake of knowledge and clarity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho ariyā mantenti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the noble ones consult, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">esā ariyāna mantanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is a noble consultation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaññāya medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing this, an intelligent person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na samusseyya mantaye”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">would consult without arrogance.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
