<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.073-73. Mahānāmasakkasutta  - 73. With Mahānāma the Sakyan </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.073. 73. Mahānāmasakkasutta  - 73. With Mahānāma the Sakyan </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Ānandavagga  - 8. Ānanda </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ nigrodhārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā gilānā vuṭṭhito hoti aciravuṭṭhito gelaññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha had recently recovered from an illness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahānāmo sakko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho mahānāmo sakko bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dīgharattāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā evaṃ dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“For a long time, sir, I have understood your teaching like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samāhitassa ñāṇaṃ, no asamāhitassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Knowledge is for those with immersion, not those without immersion.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhi nu kho, bhante, pubbe, pacchā ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But, sir, does immersion come first, then knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">udāhu ñāṇaṃ pubbe, pacchā samādhī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or does knowledge come first, then immersion?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato ānandassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavā kho gilānavuṭṭhito aciravuṭṭhito gelaññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha has recently recovered from an illness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayañca mahānāmo sakko bhagavantaṃ atigambhīraṃ pañhaṃ pucchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and this Mahānāma asks him a question that’s too deep. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ mahānāmaṃ sakkaṃ ekamantaṃ apanetvā dhammaṃ deseyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I take him off to one side and teach him the Dhamma?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando mahānāmaṃ sakkaṃ bāhāyaṃ gahetvā ekamantaṃ apanetvā mahānāmaṃ sakkaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Ānanda took Mahānāma by the arm, led him off to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sekhampi kho, mahānāma, sīlaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā, asekhampi sīlaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā; sekhopi samādhi vutto bhagavatā, asekhopi samādhi vutto bhagavatā; sekhāpi paññā vuttā bhagavatā, asekhāpi paññā vuttā bhagavatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mahānāma, the Buddha has spoken of the ethics, immersion, and wisdom of a trainee; and the ethics, immersion, and wisdom of an adept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, mahānāma, sekhaṃ sīlaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the ethics of a trainee? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, mahānāma, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, mahānāma, sekhaṃ sīlaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the ethics of a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, mahānāma, sekho samādhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the immersion of a trainee? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, mahānāma, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahānāma, sekho samādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the immersion of a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, mahānāma, sekhā paññā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the wisdom of a trainee? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, mahānāma, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahānāma, sekhā paññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the wisdom of a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kho so, mahānāma, ariyasāvako evaṃ sīlasampanno evaṃ samādhisampanno evaṃ paññāsampanno āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a noble disciple—accomplished in ethics, immersion, and wisdom—realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, mahānāma, sekhampi sīlaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā, asekhampi sīlaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā; sekhopi samādhi vutto bhagavatā, asekhopi samādhi vutto bhagavatā; sekhāpi paññā vuttā bhagavatā, asekhāpi paññā vuttā bhagavatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha has spoken of the ethics, immersion, and wisdom of both a trainee and an adept.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
