<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.034-34. Nidānasutta  - 34. Sources </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.034. 34. Nidānasutta  - 34. Sources </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Devadūtavagga  - 4. Messengers of the Gods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lobho nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya, doso nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya, moho nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, lobhapakataṃ kammaṃ lobhajaṃ lobhanidānaṃ lobhasamudayaṃ, yatthassa attabhāvo nibbattati tattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from greed—born, sourced, and originated from greed—ripens where that new life-form is born. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati tattha tassa kammassa vipākaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti, diṭṭhe vā dhamme upapajja vā apare vā pariyāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, dosapakataṃ kammaṃ dosajaṃ dosanidānaṃ dosasamudayaṃ, yatthassa attabhāvo nibbattati tattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from hate—born, sourced, and originated from hate—ripens where that new life-form is born. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati tattha tassa kammassa vipākaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti, diṭṭhe vā dhamme upapajja vā apare vā pariyāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, mohapakataṃ kammaṃ mohajaṃ mohanidānaṃ mohasamudayaṃ, yatthassa attabhāvo nibbattati tattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from delusion—born, sourced, and originated from delusion—ripens where that new life-form is born. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati tattha tassa kammassa vipākaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti, diṭṭhe vā dhamme upapajja vā apare vā pariyāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, bījāni akhaṇḍāni apūtīni avātātapahatāni sārādāni sukhasayitāni sukhette suparikammakatāya bhūmiyā nikkhittāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. They’re sown in a well-prepared, productive field, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devo ca sammādhāraṃ anuppaveccheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the heavens provide plenty of rain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evassu tāni, bhikkhave, bījāni vuddhiṃ viruḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those seeds would grow, increase, and mature. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yaṃ lobhapakataṃ kammaṃ lobhajaṃ lobhanidānaṃ lobhasamudayaṃ, yatthassa attabhāvo nibbattati tattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, any deed that emerges from greed—born, sourced, and originated from greed—ripens where that new life-form is born. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati tattha tassa kammassa vipākaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti, diṭṭhe vā dhamme upapajja vā apare vā pariyāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ dosapakataṃ kammaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from hate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ mohapakataṃ kammaṃ mohajaṃ mohanidānaṃ mohasamudayaṃ, yatthassa attabhāvo nibbattati tattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from delusion—born, sourced, and originated from delusion—ripens where that new life-form is born. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha taṃ kammaṃ vipaccati tattha tassa kammassa vipākaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti, diṭṭhe vā dhamme upapajja vā apare vā pariyāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are three sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alobho nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya, adoso nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya, amoho nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, alobhapakataṃ kammaṃ alobhajaṃ alobhanidānaṃ alobhasamudayaṃ, lobhe vigate evaṃ taṃ kammaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti ucchinnamūlaṃ tālāvatthukataṃ anabhāvaṅkataṃ āyatiṃ anuppādadhammaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from contentment—born, sourced, and originated from contentment—is given up when greed is done away with. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, adosapakataṃ kammaṃ adosajaṃ adosanidānaṃ adosasamudayaṃ, dose vigate evaṃ taṃ kammaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti ucchinnamūlaṃ tālāvatthukataṃ anabhāvaṅkataṃ āyatiṃ anuppādadhammaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from love—born, sourced, and originated from love—is abandoned when hate is done away with. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, amohapakataṃ kammaṃ amohajaṃ amohanidānaṃ amohasamudayaṃ, mohe vigate evaṃ taṃ kammaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti ucchinnamūlaṃ tālāvatthukataṃ anabhāvaṅkataṃ āyatiṃ anuppādadhammaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from understanding—born, sourced, and originated from understanding—is abandoned when delusion is done away with. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, bījāni akhaṇḍāni apūtīni avātātapahatāni sārādāni sukhasayitāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not damaged by wind and sun, fertile, and well-kept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni puriso agginā ḍaheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But someone would burn them with fire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agginā ḍahitvā masiṃ kareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">reduce them to ashes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Masiṃ karitvā mahāvāte vā ophuṇeyya nadiyā vā sīghasotāya pavāheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sweep away the ashes in a strong wind, or float them away down a swift stream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evassu tāni, bhikkhave, bījāni ucchinnamūlāni tālāvatthukatāni anabhāvaṃkatāni āyatiṃ anuppādadhammāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those seeds would be cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yaṃ alobhapakataṃ kammaṃ alobhajaṃ alobhanidānaṃ alobhasamudayaṃ, lobhe vigate evaṃ taṃ kammaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti ucchinnamūlaṃ tālāvatthukataṃ anabhāvaṃkataṃ āyatiṃ anuppādadhammaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, any deed that emerges from contentment—born, sourced, and originated from contentment—is abandoned when greed is done away with. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ adosapakataṃ kammaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from love … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ amohapakataṃ kammaṃ amohajaṃ amohanidānaṃ amohasamudayaṃ, mohe vigate evaṃ taṃ kammaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any deed that emerges from understanding—born, sourced, and originated from understanding—is abandoned when delusion is done away with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyatiṃ anuppādadhammaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are three sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lobhajaṃ dosajañceva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an ignorant person acts </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mohajañcāpaviddasu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">out of greed, hate, or delusion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ tena pakataṃ kammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">any deeds they have performed </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appaṃ vā yadi vā bahuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">—whether a little or a lot—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idheva taṃ vedaniyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">are to be experienced right here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vatthu aññaṃ na vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not in any other place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā lobhañca dosañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So a wise person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mohajañcāpi viddasu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a mendicant arousing knowledge </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjaṃ uppādayaṃ bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">of the outcome of greed, hate, and delusion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbā duggatiyo jahe”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">abandons all bad destinations.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
