<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.163-182-163–182  - 163–182 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.163-182. 163–182  - 163–182 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Kammapathapeyyāla  - 17. Courses of Deeds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca pāṇātipātī hoti, parañca pāṇātipāte samādapeti, pāṇātipāte ca samanuñño hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to kill living creatures. And they approve of killing living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these three qualities is cast down to hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ sagge. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, parañca pāṇātipātā veramaṇiyā samādapeti, pāṇātipātā veramaṇiyā ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to not kill living creatures. And they approve of not killing living creatures. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca adinnādāyī hoti, parañca adinnādāne samādapeti, adinnādāne ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves steal. They encourage others to steal. And they approve of stealing. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, parañca adinnādānā veramaṇiyā samādapeti, adinnādānā veramaṇiyā ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t themselves steal. They encourage others to not steal. And they approve of not stealing. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca kāmesumicchācārī hoti, parañca kāmesumicchācāre samādapeti, kāmesumicchācāre ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of committing sexual misconduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti, parañca kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇiyā samādapeti, kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇiyā ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to not commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of not committing sexual misconduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca musāvādī hoti, parañca musāvāde samādapeti, musāvāde ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves lie. They encourage others to lie. And they approve of lying. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, parañca musāvādā veramaṇiyā samādapeti, musāvādā veramaṇiyā ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t themselves lie. They encourage others to not lie. And they approve of not lying. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca pisuṇavāco hoti, parañca pisuṇāya vācāya samādapeti, pisuṇāya vācāya ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to speak divisively. And they approve of speaking divisively. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, parañca pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇiyā samādapeti, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇiyā ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to not speak divisively. And they approve of not speaking divisively. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca pharusavāco hoti, parañca pharusāya vācāya samādapeti, pharusāya vācāya ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to speak harshly. And they approve of speaking harshly. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, parañca pharusāya vācāya veramaṇiyā samādapeti, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇiyā ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. (12) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to not speak harshly. And they approve of not speaking harshly. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca samphappalāpī hoti, parañca samphappalāpe samādapeti, samphappalāpe ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to talk nonsense. And they approve of talking nonsense. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti, parañca samphappalāpā veramaṇiyā samādapeti, samphappalāpā veramaṇiyā ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. (14) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to not talk nonsense. And they approve of not talking nonsense. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca abhijjhālu hoti, parañca abhijjhāya samādapeti, abhijjhāya ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves are covetous. They encourage others to be covetous. And they approve of covetousness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca anabhijjhālu hoti, parañca anabhijjhāya samādapeti, anabhijjhāya ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. (16) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves are content. They encourage others to be contented. And they approve of being contented. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca byāpannacitto hoti, parañca byāpāde samādapeti, byāpāde ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves have ill will. They encourage others to have ill will. And they approve of having ill will. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca abyāpannacitto hoti, parañca abyāpāde samādapeti, abyāpāde ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. (18) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves are kind-hearted. They encourage others to be kind-hearted. And they approve of kind-heartedness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca micchādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca micchādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti, micchādiṭṭhiyā ca samanuñño hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves have wrong view. They encourage others to have wrong view. And they approve of wrong view. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā ca sammādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca sammādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti, sammādiṭṭhiyā ca samanuñño hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They themselves have right view. They encourage others to have right view. And they approve of right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ sagge”ti. (20) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these three qualities is raised up to heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammapathapeyyālaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇaṃ adinnamicchā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādī ca pisuṇā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusā samphappalāpo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhijjhā byāpādadiṭṭhi ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammapathesu peyyālaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tikakena niyojayeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
