<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.075-75. Nivesakasutta  - 75. Support </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.075. 75. Nivesakasutta  - 75. Support </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Ānandavagga  - 8. Ānanda </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye, ānanda, anukampeyyātha ye ca sotabbaṃ maññeyyuṃ mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā te vo, ānanda, tīsu ṭhānesu samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesu tīsu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddhe aveccappasāde samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Experiential confidence in the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ, buddho bhagavā’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhamme aveccappasāde samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Experiential confidence in the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃghe aveccappasāde samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho ujuppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho ñāyappaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho sāmīcippaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho, yadidaṃ cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā esa bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, straightforward, methodical, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siyā, ānanda, catunnaṃ mahābhūtānaṃ aññathattaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There might be change in the four primary elements—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pathavīdhātuyā āpodhātuyā tejodhātuyā vāyodhātuyā, na tveva buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatassa ariyasāvakassa siyā aññathattaṃ tatridaṃ aññathattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">earth, water, air, and fire—but a noble disciple with experiential confidence in the Buddha would never change. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vatānanda, buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato ariyasāvako nirayaṃ vā tiracchānayoniṃ vā pettivisayaṃ vā upapajjissatīti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, ‘change’ means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm: this is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siyā, ānanda, catunnaṃ mahābhūtānaṃ aññathattaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There might be change in the four primary elements—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pathavīdhātuyā āpodhātuyā tejodhātuyā vāyodhātuyā, na tveva dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">earth, water, air, and fire—but a noble disciple with experiential confidence in the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na tveva saṅghe aveccappasādena samannāgatassa ariyasāvakassa siyā aññathattaṃ tatridaṃ aññathattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or the Saṅgha would never change. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vatānanda, saṅghe aveccappasādena samannāgato ariyasāvako nirayaṃ vā tiracchānayoniṃ vā pettivisayaṃ vā upapajjissatīti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, ‘change’ means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm: this is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye, ānanda, anukampeyyātha ye ca sotabbaṃ maññeyyuṃ mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā te vo, ānanda, imesu tīsu ṭhānesu samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in these three things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
