<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.089-89. Paṭhamasikkhattayasutta  - 89. Three Trainings (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.089. 89. Paṭhamasikkhattayasutta  - 89. Three Trainings (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Samaṇavagga  - 9. Ascetics </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, sikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these are the three trainings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhisīlasikkhā, adhicittasikkhā, adhipaññāsikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, adhisīlasikkhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the training in the higher ethics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the code of conduct, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, adhisīlasikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the training in the higher ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, adhicittasikkhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the training in the higher mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, adhicittasikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the training in the higher mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, adhipaññāsikkhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the training in the higher wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, adhipaññāsikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the training in the higher wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso sikkhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three trainings.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
