<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.105-105. Dutiyaassādasutta  - 105. Gratification (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.105. 105. Dutiyaassādasutta  - 105. Gratification (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Sambodhavagga  - 11. Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No cedaṃ, bhikkhave, loke assādo abhavissa, nayidaṃ sattā loke sārajjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if there were no gratification in the world, sentient beings wouldn’t love it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, atthi loke assādo, tasmā sattā loke sārajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because there is gratification in the world, sentient beings do love it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No cedaṃ, bhikkhave, loke ādīnavo abhavissa, nayidaṃ sattā loke nibbindeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the world had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn’t grow disillusioned with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, atthi loke ādīnavo, tasmā sattā loke nibbindanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because the world has a drawback, sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No cedaṃ, bhikkhave, loke nissaraṇaṃ abhavissa, nayidaṃ sattā lokamhā nissareyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If there were no escape from the world, sentient beings wouldn’t escape from it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, atthi loke nissaraṇaṃ, tasmā sattā lokamhā nissaranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because there is an escape from the world, sentient beings do escape from it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, sattā lokassa assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ nābbhaññāsuṃ, neva tāva, bhikkhave, sattā sadevakā lokā samārakā sabrahmakā sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya nissaṭā visaṃyuttā vippamuttā vimariyādīkatena cetasā vihariṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as sentient beings don’t truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they haven’t escaped from this world—with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—and they don’t live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, sattā lokassa assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsuṃ, atha, bhikkhave, sattā sadevakā lokā samārakā sabrahmakā sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya nissaṭā visaṃyuttā vippamuttā vimariyādīkatena cetasā viharantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when sentient beings truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they’ve escaped from this world—with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—and they live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
