<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.074-74. Nigaṇṭhasutta  - 74. Jains </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.074. 74. Nigaṇṭhasutta  - 74. Jains </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Ānandavagga  - 8. Ānanda </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ānando vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho abhayo ca licchavi paṇḍitakumārako ca licchavi yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho abhayo licchavi āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Licchavis Abhaya and Paṇḍitakumāra went up to Venerable Ānanda, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nigaṇṭho, bhante, nāṭaputto sabbaññū sabbadassāvī aparisesaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ paṭijānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the Jain leader Nāṭaputta claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception, thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘carato ca me tiṭṭhato ca suttassa ca jāgarassa ca satataṃ samitaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ paccupaṭṭhitan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually present to me, while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So purāṇānaṃ kammānaṃ tapasā byantībhāvaṃ paññāpeti navānaṃ kammānaṃ akaraṇā setughātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He advocates the elimination of past karma by mortification, and breaking the bridge by not making new karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kammakkhayā dukkhakkhayo, dukkhakkhayā vedanākkhayo, vedanākkhayā sabbaṃ dukkhaṃ nijjiṇṇaṃ bhavissati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So with the ending of karma, suffering ends; with the ending of suffering, feeling ends; and with the ending of feeling, all suffering will have been worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametissā sandiṭṭhikāya nijjarāya visuddhiyā samatikkamo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how to go beyond suffering by means of this purification by wearing away in this very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhante, bhagavā kimāhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What, sir, does the Buddha say about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso kho imā, abhaya, nijjarā visuddhiyo tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena sammadakkhātā sattānaṃ visuddhiyā sokaparidevānaṃ samatikkamāya dukkhadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamāya ñāyassa adhigamāya nibbānassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Abhaya, these three kinds of purification by wearing away have been rightly explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to end the cycle of suffering, and to realize extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, abhaya, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when, Abhaya, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the code of conduct, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So navañca kammaṃ na karoti, purāṇañca kammaṃ phussa phussa byantīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sandiṭṭhikā nijjarā akālikā ehipassikā opaneyyikā paccattaṃ veditabbā viññūhīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This wearing away is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kho so, abhaya, bhikkhu evaṃ sīlasampanno vivicceva kāmehi … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant accomplished in ethics, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So navañca kammaṃ na karoti, purāṇañca kammaṃ phussa phussa byantīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sandiṭṭhikā nijjarā akālikā ehipassikā opaneyyikā paccattaṃ veditabbā viññūhīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This wearing away is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kho so, abhaya, bhikkhu evaṃ samādhisampanno āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant accomplished in immersion realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So navañca kammaṃ na karoti, purāṇañca kammaṃ phussa phussa byantīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sandiṭṭhikā nijjarā akālikā ehipassikā opaneyyikā paccattaṃ veditabbā viññūhīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This wearing away is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, abhaya, tisso nijjarā visuddhiyo tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena sammadakkhātā sattānaṃ visuddhiyā sokaparidevānaṃ samatikkamāya dukkhadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamāya ñāyassa adhigamāya nibbānassa sacchikiriyāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three kinds of purification by wearing away that have been rightly explained by the Buddha … in order to realize extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, paṇḍitakumārako licchavi abhayaṃ licchaviṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Paṇḍitakumāra said to Abhaya, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ pana tvaṃ, samma abhaya, āyasmato ānandassa subhāsitaṃ subhāsitato nābbhanumodasī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Dear Abhaya, is there anything in what Ānanda has said so well that you would disagree with?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kyāhaṃ, samma paṇḍitakumāraka, āyasmato ānandassa subhāsitaṃ subhāsitato nābbhanumodissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could I not agree with what was said so well by Ānanda? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muddhāpi tassa vipateyya yo āyasmato ānandassa subhāsitaṃ subhāsitato nābbhanumodeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If anyone didn’t agree with him, their head would explode!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
