<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.143-143. Paṭhamamoranivāpasutta  - 143. At the Peacocks’ Feeding Ground (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.143. 143. Paṭhamamoranivāpasutta  - 143. At the Peacocks’ Feeding Ground (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Yodhājīvavagga  - 14. A Warrior </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati moranivāpe paribbājakārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, at the monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asekkhena sīlakkhandhena, asekkhena samādhikkhandhena, asekkhena paññākkhandhena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The entire spectrum of an adept’s ethics, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
