<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.118-118. Apaṇṇakasutta  - 118. Loaded Dice </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.118. 118. Apaṇṇakasutta  - 118. Loaded Dice </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Āpāyikavagga  - 12. Bound for Loss </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vipattiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are three failures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavipatti, cittavipatti, diṭṭhivipatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Failure in ethics, mind, and view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sīlavipatti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is failure in ethics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātī hoti … pe … samphappalāpī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sīlavipatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘failure in ethics’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, cittavipatti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is failure in mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco abhijjhālu hoti byāpannacitto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone is covetous and malicious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, cittavipatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘failure in mind’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, diṭṭhivipatti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is failure in view? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco micchādiṭṭhiko hoti viparītadassano: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone has wrong view, a distorted perspective, such as: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi dinnaṃ, natthi yiṭṭhaṃ … pe … ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no obligation to mother and father. No beings are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is well attained and practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, diṭṭhivipatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘failure in view’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavipattihetu vā, bhikkhave … pe … diṭṭhivipattihetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, apaṇṇako maṇi uddhaṃ khitto yena yeneva patiṭṭhāti suppatiṭṭhitaṃyeva patiṭṭhāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like throwing loaded dice: they always fall the right side up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, sīlavipattihetu vā sattā … pe … upapajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso vipattiyoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three failures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tisso imā, bhikkhave, sampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are three accomplishments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlasampadā, cittasampadā, diṭṭhisampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Accomplishment in ethics, mind, and view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sīlasampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in ethics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sīlasampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called accomplishment in ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, cittasampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco anabhijjhālu hoti abyāpannacitto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone is content and kind-hearted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, cittasampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called accomplishment in mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, diṭṭhisampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in view? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sammādiṭṭhiko hoti aviparītadassano: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone has right view, an undistorted perspective, such as: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi dinnaṃ, atthi yiṭṭhaṃ … pe … ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There is obligation to mother and father. There are beings reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are well attained and practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, diṭṭhisampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called accomplishment in view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlasampadāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjanti. Cittasampadāhetu vā … pe … diṭṭhisampadāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, apaṇṇako maṇi uddhaṃ khitto yena yeneva patiṭṭhāti suppatiṭṭhitaṃyeva patiṭṭhāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like throwing loaded dice: they always fall the right side up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, sīlasampadāhetu vā sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjanti, cittasampadāhetu vā sattā … pe … diṭṭhisampadāhetu vā sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso sampadā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three accomplishments.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
