<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.068-68. Aññatitthiyasutta  - 68. Followers of Other Paths </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.068. 68. Aññatitthiyasutta  - 68. Followers of Other Paths </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Mahāvagga  - 7. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṃ puccheyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if wanderers who follow other paths were to ask: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tayome, āvuso, dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are these three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgo, doso, moho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, āvuso, tayo dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ, āvuso, tiṇṇaṃ dhammānaṃ ko viseso ko adhippayāso kiṃ nānākaraṇan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s the difference between them?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ kinti byākareyyāthā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How would you answer them?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṃnettikā bhagavaṃpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu vata, bhante, bhagavantaṃyeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhikkhave, suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, mendicants, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṃ puccheyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if wanderers who follow other paths were to ask: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tayome, āvuso, dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are these three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgo, doso, moho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, āvuso, tayo dhammā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imesaṃ, āvuso, tiṇṇaṃ dhammānaṃ ko viseso ko adhippayāso kiṃ nānākaraṇan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s the difference between them?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ evaṃ byākareyyātha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should answer them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘rāgo kho, āvuso, appasāvajjo dandhavirāgī, doso mahāsāvajjo khippavirāgī, moho mahāsāvajjo dandhavirāgī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Greed, reverends, is mildly blameworthy, but slow to fade away. Hate is very blameworthy, but quick to fade away. Delusion is very blameworthy, and slow to fade away.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ko panāvuso, hetu ko paccayo yena anuppanno vā rāgo uppajjati uppanno vā rāgo bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattatī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if they ask: ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why greed arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Subhanimittan”tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The beautiful feature of things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa subhanimittaṃ ayoniso manasi karoto anuppanno vā rāgo uppajjati uppanno vā rāgo bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you attend improperly to the beautiful feature of things, greed arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena anuppanno vā rāgo uppajjati uppanno vā rāgo bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why greed arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ko panāvuso, hetu ko paccayo yena anuppanno vā doso uppajjati uppanno vā doso bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattatī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if they ask: ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why hate arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Paṭighanimittan”tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The feature of harshness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa paṭighanimittaṃ ayoniso manasi karoto anuppanno vā doso uppajjati uppanno vā doso bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you attend improperly to the feature of harshness, hate arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena anuppanno vā doso uppajjati uppanno vā doso bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why hate arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ko panāvuso, hetu ko paccayo yena anuppanno vā moho uppajjati uppanno vā moho bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattatī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if they ask: ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Ayoniso manasikāro”tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Improper attention. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ayoniso manasi karoto anuppanno vā moho uppajjati uppanno vā moho bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you attend improperly, delusion arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena anuppanno vā moho uppajjati uppanno vā moho bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why delusion arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ko panāvuso, hetu ko paccayo yena anuppanno ceva rāgo nuppajjati uppanno ca rāgo pahīyatī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if they ask, ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why greed doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Asubhanimittan”tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The ugly feature of things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa asubhanimittaṃ yoniso manasi karoto anuppanno ceva rāgo nuppajjati uppanno ca rāgo pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you attend properly on the ugly feature of things, greed doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena anuppanno ceva rāgo nuppajjati uppanno ca rāgo pahīyatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why greed doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ko panāvuso, hetu ko paccayo yena anuppanno ceva doso nuppajjati uppanno ca doso pahīyatī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if they ask, ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why hate doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Mettā cetovimuttī”tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The heart’s release by love.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mettaṃ cetovimuttiṃ yoniso manasi karoto anuppanno ceva doso nuppajjati uppanno ca doso pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you attend properly on the heart’s release by love, hate doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena anuppanno ceva doso nuppajjati uppanno ca doso pahīyatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why hate doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ko panāvuso, hetu ko paccayo yena anuppanno ceva moho nuppajjati uppanno ca moho pahīyatī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if they ask, ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘“Yonisomanasikāro”tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Proper attention. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa yoniso manasi karoto anuppanno ceva moho nuppajjati uppanno ca moho pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you attend properly, delusion doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena anuppanno vā moho nuppajjati uppanno ca moho pahīyatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why delusion doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
