<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.122-122. Moneyyasutta  - 122. Sagacity </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.122. 122. Moneyyasutta  - 122. Sagacity </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Āpāyikavagga  - 12. Bound for Loss </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, moneyyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three kinds of sagacity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyamoneyyaṃ, vacīmoneyyaṃ, manomoneyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sagacity of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, kāyamoneyyaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is sagacity of body? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, abrahmacariyā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or have sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kāyamoneyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘sagacity of body’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, vacīmoneyyaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is sagacity of speech? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vacīmoneyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘sagacity of speech’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, manomoneyyaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is sagacity of mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, manomoneyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘sagacity of mind’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi moneyyānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three kinds of sagacity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyamuniṃ vacīmuniṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A sage in body, a sage in speech, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cetomuniṃ anāsavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and an undefiled sage in heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muniṃ moneyyasampannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A sage, blessed with sagacity, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āhu sabbappahāyinan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">has given up everything, they say.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpāyikavaggo dutiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpāyiko dullabho appameyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āneñjavipattisampadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaṇṇako ca kammanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve soceyyāni moneyyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
