<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.017-17. Attabyābādhasutta  - 17. Hurting Yourself </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.017. 17. Attabyābādhasutta  - 17. Hurting Yourself </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rathakāravagga  - 2. The Chariot-maker </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, dhammā attabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti, parabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti, ubhayabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These three things, mendicants, lead to hurting yourself, hurting others, and hurting both. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyaduccaritaṃ, vacīduccaritaṃ, manoduccaritaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo dhammā attabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti, parabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti, ubhayabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are three things that lead to hurting yourself, hurting others, and hurting both. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayome, bhikkhave, dhammā nevattabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti, na parabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti, na ubhayabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These three things, mendicants, don’t lead to hurting yourself, hurting others, or hurting both. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasucaritaṃ, vacīsucaritaṃ, manosucaritaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo dhammā nevattabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti, na parabyābādhāyapi saṃvattanti, na ubhayabyābādhāyapi saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are three things that don’t lead to hurting yourself, hurting others, or hurting both.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
