<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.023-23. Saṅkhārasutta  - 23. Choices </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.023. 23. Saṅkhārasutta  - 23. Choices </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Puggalavagga  - 3. Persons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These three people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sabyābajjhaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti, sabyābajjhaṃ vacīsaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti, sabyābajjhaṃ manosaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a certain person makes hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sabyābajjhaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharitvā, sabyābajjhaṃ vacīsaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharitvā, sabyābajjhaṃ manosaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharitvā sabyābajjhaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having made these choices, they’re reborn in a hurtful world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ sabyābajjhaṃ lokaṃ upapannaṃ samānaṃ sabyābajjhā phassā phusanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where hurtful contacts touch them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sabyābajjhehi phassehi phuṭṭho samāno sabyābajjhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayati ekantadukkhaṃ, seyyathāpi sattā nerayikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touched by hurtful contacts, they experience hurtful feelings that are exclusively painful—like the beings in hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo abyābajjhaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti, abyābajjhaṃ vacīsaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti, abyābajjhaṃ manosaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, another person makes pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So abyābajjhaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharitvā, abyābajjhaṃ vacīsaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharitvā, abyābajjhaṃ manosaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharitvā abyābajjhaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having made these choices, they are reborn in a pleasing world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ abyābajjhaṃ lokaṃ upapannaṃ samānaṃ abyābajjhā phassā phusanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where pleasing contacts touch them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So abyābajjhehi phassehi phuṭṭho samāno abyābajjhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayati ekantasukhaṃ, seyyathāpi devā subhakiṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touched by pleasing contacts, they experience pleasing feelings that are exclusively happy—like the gods replete with glory. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti, sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi vacīsaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti, sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi manosaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, another person makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharitvā, sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi vacīsaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharitvā, sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi manosaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharitvā sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having made these choices, they are reborn in a world that is both hurtful and pleasing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi lokaṃ upapannaṃ samānaṃ sabyābajjhāpi abyābajjhāpi phassā phusanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where hurtful and pleasing contacts touch them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sabyābajjhehipi abyābajjhehipi phassehi phuṭṭho samāno sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi vedanaṃ vedayati vokiṇṇasukhadukkhaṃ, seyyathāpi manussā ekacce ca devā ekacce ca vinipātikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touched by both hurtful and pleasing contacts, they experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a mixture of pleasure and pain—like humans, some gods, and some beings in the underworld. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
