<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.156-162-156–162  - 156–162 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.156-162. 156–162  - 156–162 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Acelakavagga  - 16. Naked </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are three practices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āgāḷhā paṭipadā, nijjhāmā paṭipadā, majjhimā paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The addicted practice, the scorching practice, and the middle practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, āgāḷhā paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the addicted practice? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco evaṃvādī hoti evaṃdiṭṭhi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone has this doctrine and view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi kāmesu doso’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There’s nothing wrong with sensual pleasures’; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāmesu pātabyataṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so they throw themselves into sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, āgāḷhā paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the addicted practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nijjhāmā paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the scorching practice? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco acelako hoti muttācāro, hatthāpalekhano, naehibhadantiko, natiṭṭhabhadantiko, nābhihaṭaṃ na uddissakataṃ na nimantanaṃ sādiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone goes naked, ignoring conventions. They lick their hands, and don’t come or wait when asked. They don’t consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on purpose for them, or an invitation for a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So na kumbhimukhā paṭiggaṇhāti, na kaḷopimukhā paṭiggaṇhāti na eḷakamantaraṃ na daṇḍamantaraṃ na musalamantaraṃ na dvinnaṃ bhuñjamānānaṃ na gabbhiniyā na pāyamānāya na purisantaragatāya na saṅkittīsu na yattha sā upaṭṭhito hoti na yattha makkhikā saṇḍasaṇḍacārinī na macchaṃ na maṃsaṃ na suraṃ na merayaṃ, na thusodakaṃ pivati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or where there’s a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or liquor or wine, and drink no beer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ekāgāriko vā hoti ekālopiko, dvāgāriko vā hoti dvālopiko … sattāgāriko vā hoti sattālopiko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They go to just one house for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekissāpi dattiyā yāpeti, dvīhipi dattīhi yāpeti … sattahipi dattīhi yāpeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāreti, dvāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāreti … sattāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāreti—iti evarūpaṃ addhamāsikampi pariyāyabhattabhojanānuyogamanuyutto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat once a day, once every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They live pursuing the practice of eating food at set intervals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sākabhakkhopi hoti, sāmākabhakkhopi hoti, nīvārabhakkhopi hoti, daddulabhakkhopi hoti, haṭabhakkhopi hoti, kaṇabhakkhopi hoti, ācāmabhakkhopi hoti, piññākabhakkhopi hoti, tiṇabhakkhopi hoti, gomayabhakkhopi hoti, vanamūlaphalāhāro yāpeti pavattaphalabhojī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sāṇānipi dhāreti, masāṇānipi dhāreti, chavadussānipi dhāreti, paṃsukūlānipi dhāreti, tirīṭānipi dhāreti, ajinampi dhāreti, ajinakkhipampi dhāreti, kusacīrampi dhāreti, vākacīrampi dhāreti, phalakacīrampi dhāreti, kesakambalampi dhāreti, vāḷakambalampi dhāreti, ulūkapakkhikampi dhāreti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark, wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls’ wings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kesamassulocakopi hoti kesamassulocanānuyogamanuyutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They tear out their hair and beard, committed to this practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubbhaṭṭhakopi hoti āsanapaṭikkhitto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They constantly stand, refusing seats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkuṭikopi hoti ukkuṭikappadhānamanuyutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They squat, committed to persisting in the squatting position. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṇṭakāpassayikopi hoti kaṇṭakāpassaye seyyaṃ kappeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāyatatiyakampi udakorohanānuyogamanuyutto viharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They pursue the practice of immersion in water three times a day, including the evening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti evarūpaṃ anekavihitaṃ kāyassa ātāpanaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so they live pursuing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nijjhāmā paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the scorching practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, majjhimā paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the middle practice? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of the mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, majjhimā paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the middle practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso paṭipadāti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three practices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tisso imā, bhikkhave, paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, there are three practices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āgāḷhā paṭipadā, nijjhāmā paṭipadā, majjhimā paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The addicted practice, the scorching practice, the middle practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, āgāḷhā paṭipadā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the addicted practice? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, āgāḷhā paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the addicted practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nijjhāmā paṭipadā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the scorching practice? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nijjhāmā paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the scorching practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, majjhimā paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the middle practice? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ anuppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati …. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandasamādhipadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhipadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti … pe …. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhindriyaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the faculty of faith … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyindriyaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satindriyaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mindfulness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhindriyaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">immersion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññindriyaṃ bhāveti … pe …. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">wisdom … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhābalaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the power of faith … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyabalaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satibalaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mindfulness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhibalaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">immersion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññābalaṃ bhāveti … pe …. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">wisdom … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the awakening factor of mindfulness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">investigation of principles … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">rapture … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passaddhisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tranquility … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">immersion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … pe …. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">equanimity … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop right view … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsaṅkappaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right thought … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammantaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right action … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right livelihood … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsatiṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right mindfulness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right immersion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, majjhimā paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the middle practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso paṭipadā”ti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three practices.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavaggo chaṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satipaṭṭhānaṃ sammappadhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iddhipādindriyena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Balaṃ bojjhaṅgo maggo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭipadāya yojayeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
