<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.110-110. Byāpannasutta  - 110. Fallen </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.110. 110. Byāpannasutta  - 110. Fallen </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Sambodhavagga  - 11. Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder Anāthapiṇḍika: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“citte, gahapati, byāpanne kāyakammampi byāpannaṃ hoti, vacīkammampi byāpannaṃ hoti, manokammampi byāpannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, when the mind is fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are fallen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa byāpannakāyakammantassa byāpannavacīkammantassa byāpannamanokammantassa na bhaddakaṃ maraṇaṃ hoti, na bhaddikā kālakiriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are fallen will not have a good death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, gahapati, kūṭāgāre ducchanne kūṭampi byāpannaṃ hoti, gopānasiyopi byāpannā honti, bhittipi byāpannā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a bungalow with a bad roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls fall in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, gahapati, citte byāpanne kāyakammampi byāpannaṃ hoti, vacīkammampi byāpannaṃ hoti, manokammampi byāpannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the mind is fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are fallen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa byāpannakāyakammantassa byāpannavacīkammantassa byāpannamanokammantassa na bhaddakaṃ maraṇaṃ hoti, na bhaddikā kālakiriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are fallen will not have a good death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Citte, gahapati, abyāpanne kāyakammampi abyāpannaṃ hoti, vacīkammampi abyāpannaṃ hoti, manokammampi abyāpannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not fallen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa abyāpannakāyakammantassa abyāpannavacīkammantassa abyāpannamanokammantassa bhaddakaṃ maraṇaṃ hoti, bhaddikā kālakiriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen will have a good death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, gahapati, kūṭāgāre succhanne kūṭampi abyāpannaṃ hoti, gopānasiyopi abyāpannā honti, bhittipi abyāpannā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a bungalow with a good roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls are not fallen in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, gahapati, citte abyāpanne kāyakammampi abyāpannaṃ hoti, vacīkammampi abyāpannaṃ hoti, manokammampi abyāpannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not fallen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa abyāpannakāyakammantassa … pe … abyāpannamanokammantassa bhaddakaṃ maraṇaṃ hoti, bhaddikā kālakiriyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen will have a good death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
