<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.039-39. Anudhammasutta  - 39. In Line With the Teachings </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.039. 39. Anudhammasutta  - 39. In Line With the Teachings </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Natumhākavagga  - 4. It’s Not Yours </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhammānudhammappaṭipannassa, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno ayamanudhammo hoti </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a mendicant is practicing in line with the teachings, this is what’s in line with the teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ rūpe nibbidābahulo vihareyya, vedanāya nibbidābahulo vihareyya, saññāya nibbidābahulo vihareyya, saṅkhāresu nibbidābahulo vihareyya, viññāṇe nibbidābahulo vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should live full of disillusionment for form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo rūpe nibbidābahulo viharanto, vedanāya … saññāya … saṅkhāresu nibbidābahulo viharanto, viññāṇe nibbidābahulo viharanto rūpaṃ parijānāti, vedanaṃ … saññaṃ … saṅkhāre … viññāṇaṃ parijānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Living in this way, they completely understand form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so rūpaṃ parijānaṃ, vedanaṃ … saññaṃ … saṅkhāre … viññāṇaṃ parijānaṃ parimuccati rūpamhā, parimuccati vedanāya, parimuccati saññāya, parimuccati saṅkhārehi, parimuccati viññāṇamhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Completely understanding form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness, they’re freed from these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parimuccati jātiyā jarāmaraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, parimuccati dukkhasmāti vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They’re freed from suffering, I say.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
