<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.087-87. Vakkalisutta  - 87. With Vakkali </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.087. 87. Vakkalisutta  - 87. With Vakkali </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Theravagga  - 9. Senior Mendicants </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā vakkali kumbhakāranivesane viharati ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Vakkali was staying in a potter’s shed, and he was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vakkali upaṭṭhāke āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he addressed his carers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etha tumhe, āvuso, yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamatha; upasaṅkamitvā mama vacanena bhagavato pāde sirasā vandatha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, reverends, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vakkali, bhante, bhikkhu ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno, so bhagavato pāde sirasā vandatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, the mendicant Vakkali is sick, suffering, and gravely ill. He bows with his head to your feet.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca vadetha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhu kira, bhante, bhagavā yena vakkali bhikkhu tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, please go to the mendicant Vakkali out of compassion.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato vakkalissa paṭissutvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” those monks replied. They did as he asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vakkali, bhante, bhikkhu ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno, so bhagavato pāde sirasā vandati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana vadeti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhu kira, bhante, bhagavā yena vakkali bhikkhu tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yenāyasmā vakkali tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robes, went to Venerable Vakkali. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā vakkali bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. Disvāna mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Vakkali saw the Buddha coming off in the distance and tried to rise on his cot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ vakkaliṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṃ, vakkali, mā tvaṃ mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s all right, Vakkali, don’t get up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santimāni āsanāni paññattāni; tatthāhaṃ nisīdissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some seats spread out, I will sit there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdi bhagavā paññatte āsane. Nisajja kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ vakkaliṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He sat on the seat spread out and said to Vakkali, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci te, vakkali, khamanīyaṃ, kacci yāpanīyaṃ, kacci dukkhā vedanā paṭikkamanti, no abhikkamanti; paṭikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no abhikkamo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Vakkali, I hope you’re keeping well; I hope you’re alright. And I hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ, na yāpanīyaṃ; bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā abhikkamanti, no paṭikkamanti; abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no paṭikkamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’m not all right, I’m not getting by. My pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is apparent, not its fading.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci te, vakkali, na kiñci kukkuccaṃ, na koci vippaṭisāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you don’t have any remorse or regret?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha me, bhante, anappakaṃ kukkuccaṃ, anappako vippaṭisāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, sir, I have no little remorse and regret.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci pana taṃ, vakkali, attā sīlato na upavadatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you have no reason to blame yourself when it comes to ethical conduct?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho maṃ, bhante, attā sīlato upavadatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No sir, I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No ce kira taṃ, vakkali, attā sīlato upavadati; atha kiñca te kukkuccaṃ ko ca vippaṭisāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, Vakkali, why do you have remorse and regret?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cirapaṭikāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkamitukāmo, natthi ca me kāyasmiṃ tāvatikā balamattā, yāvatāhaṃ bhagavantaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkameyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“For a long time I’ve wanted to go and see the Buddha, but I was physically too weak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alaṃ, vakkali, kiṃ te iminā pūtikāyena diṭṭhena? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Enough, Vakkali! Why would you want to see this rotten body? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, vakkali, dhammaṃ passati so maṃ passati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who sees the teaching sees me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo maṃ passati so dhammaṃ passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who sees me sees the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammañhi, vakkali, passanto maṃ passati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing the teaching, you see me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maṃ passanto dhammaṃ passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing me, you see the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, vakkali, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Vakkali? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suffering, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante” … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eso me attāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātiha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So you should truly see … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ passaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ vakkaliṃ iminā ovādena ovaditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā yena gijjhakūṭo pabbato tena pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then, after giving Venerable Vakkali this advice, the Buddha got up from his seat and went to the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vakkali acirapakkantassa bhagavato upaṭṭhāke āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vakkali addressed his carers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etha maṃ, āvuso, mañcakaṃ āropetvā yena isigilipassaṃ kāḷasilā tenupasaṅkamatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come on, reverends, lift my cot and take me to the Black Rock on the slopes of Isigili. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma mādiso antaraghare kālaṃ kattabbaṃ maññeyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s unthinkable for one like me to die in an inhabited area!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato vakkalissa paṭissutvā āyasmantaṃ vakkaliṃ mañcakaṃ āropetvā yena isigilipassaṃ kāḷasilā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” replied those mendicants, and did as he asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tañca rattiṃ tañca divāvasesaṃ gijjhakūṭe pabbate vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Meanwhile, the Buddha spent the rest of that night and day on Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho dve devatāyo abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ gijjhakūṭaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu … pe … ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, two glorious deities, lighting up the entire Vulture’s Peak, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho ekā devatā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">One deity said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vakkali, bhante, bhikkhu vimokkhāya cetetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the mendicant Vakkali is intent on liberation!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparā devatā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And another deity said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“so hi nūna, bhante, suvimutto vimuccissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He’ll definitely be well-freed!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavocuṃ tā devatāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is what those deities said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right side, before vanishing right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassā rattiyā accayena bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etha tumhe, bhikkhave, yena vakkali bhikkhu tenupasaṅkamatha; upasaṅkamitvā vakkaliṃ bhikkhuṃ evaṃ vadetha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, mendicants, go to the mendicant Vakkali and tell him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇāvuso tvaṃ, vakkali, bhagavato vacanaṃ dvinnañca devatānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Vakkali, hear the word of the Buddha and two deities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imaṃ, āvuso, rattiṃ dve devatāyo abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ gijjhakūṭaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Late last night, two glorious deities, lighting up the entire Vulture’s Peak, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho, āvuso, ekā devatā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One deity said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vakkali, bhante, bhikkhu vimokkhāya cetetīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the mendicant Vakkali is intent on liberation!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparā devatā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And another deity said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so hi nūna, bhante, suvimutto vimuccissatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He’ll definitely be well-freed!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā ca taṃ, āvuso vakkali, evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the Buddha said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā bhāyi, vakkali; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do not fear, Vakkali, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā bhāyi, vakkali. </span></p>
<p class="p3">do not fear! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apāpakaṃ te maraṇaṃ bhavissati, apāpikā kālakiriyā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your death will not be a bad one; your passing will not be a bad one.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paṭissutvā yenāyasmā vakkali tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ vakkaliṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” those monks replied. They went to Vakkali and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“suṇāvuso vakkali, bhagavato vacanaṃ dvinnañca devatānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Vakkali, hear the word of the Buddha and two deities.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vakkali upaṭṭhāke āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vakkali addressed his carers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etha maṃ, āvuso, mañcakā oropetha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, reverends, help me off my cot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma mādiso ucce āsane nisīditvā tassa bhagavato sāsanaṃ sotabbaṃ maññeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s unthinkable for one like me to listen to the Buddha’s instructions sitting on a high seat.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato vakkalissa paṭissutvā āyasmantaṃ vakkaliṃ mañcakā oropesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” replied those mendicants, and helped him off his cot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imaṃ, āvuso, rattiṃ dve devatāyo abhikkantāya rattiyā … pe … ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They repeated what the Buddha had said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho, āvuso, ekā devatā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vakkali, bhante, bhikkhu vimokkhāya cetetī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparā devatā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘so hi nūna, bhante, suvimutto vimuccissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā ca taṃ, āvuso vakkali, evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā bhāyi, vakkali; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā bhāyi, vakkali. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apāpakaṃ te maraṇaṃ bhavissati, apāpikā kālakiriyā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hāvuso, mama vacanena bhagavato pāde sirasā vandatha: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> Vakkali said, “Well then, reverends, in my name bow with your head to the Buddha’s feet. Say to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vakkali, bhante, bhikkhu ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, the mendicant Vakkali is sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhagavato pāde sirasā vandatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He bows with his head to your feet.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca vadetha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘rūpaṃ aniccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Form is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ, bhante, na kaṅkhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have no doubt of that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhanti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m certain that what is impermanent is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, natthi me tattha chando vā rāgo vā pemaṃ vāti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I’m certain that I have no desire or greed or fondness for what is impermanent, suffering, and perishable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā aniccā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling is impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ, bhante, na kaṅkhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhanti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, natthi me tattha chando vā rāgo vā pemaṃ vāti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception is impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā aniccā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ, bhante, na kaṅkhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhanti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, natthi me tattha chando vā rāgo vā pemaṃ vāti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ, bhante, na kaṅkhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have no doubt of that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhanti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m certain that what is impermanent is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, natthi me tattha chando vā rāgo vā pemaṃ vāti na vicikicchāmī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I’m certain that I have no desire or greed or fondness for what is impermanent, suffering, and perishable.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato vakkalissa paṭissutvā pakkamiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” those monks replied, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vakkali acirapakkantesu tesu bhikkhūsu satthaṃ āharesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then, not long after those mendicants had left, Venerable Vakkali slit his wrists. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those senior mendicants went up to the Buddha and told him Vakkali’s message. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vakkali, bhante, bhikkhu ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhagavato pāde sirasā vandati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca vadeti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘rūpaṃ aniccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ, bhante, na kaṅkhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhanti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, natthi me tattha chando vā rāgo vā pemaṃ vāti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ, bhante, na kaṅkhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhanti na vicikicchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, natthi me tattha chando vā rāgo vā pemaṃ vāti na vicikicchāmī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āyāma, bhikkhave, yena isigilipassaṃ kāḷasilā tenupasaṅkamissāma; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, mendicants, let’s go to the Black Rock on the slopes of Isigili, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha vakkalinā kulaputtena satthamāharitan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where Vakkali, the gentleman, slit his wrists.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sambahulehi bhikkhūhi saddhiṃ yena isigilipassaṃ kāḷasilā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha together with several mendicants went to the Black Rock on the slopes of Isigili. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ vakkaliṃ dūratova mañcake vivattakkhandhaṃ semānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha saw Vakkali off in the distance lying on his cot, having cast off the aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena dhūmāyitattaṃ timirāyitattaṃ gacchateva purimaṃ disaṃ, gacchati pacchimaṃ disaṃ, gacchati uttaraṃ disaṃ, gacchati dakkhiṇaṃ disaṃ, gacchati uddhaṃ disaṃ, gacchati adho disaṃ, gacchati anudisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a cloud of black smoke was moving east, west, north, south, above, below, and in-between. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said to the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passatha no tumhe, bhikkhave, etaṃ dhūmāyitattaṃ timirāyitattaṃ gacchateva purimaṃ disaṃ … pe … gacchati anudisan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, do you see that cloud of black smoke moving east, west, north, south, above, below, and in-between?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eso kho, bhikkhave, māro pāpimā vakkalissa kulaputtassa viññāṇaṃ samanvesati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s Māra the Wicked searching for Vakkali’s consciousness, wondering: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kattha vakkalissa kulaputtassa viññāṇaṃ patiṭṭhitan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Where is Vakkali’s consciousness established?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appatiṭṭhitena ca, bhikkhave, viññāṇena vakkali kulaputto parinibbuto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since his consciousness is not established, Vakkali is extinguished.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
