<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.128-128. Tatiyasamudayadhammasutta  - 128. Liable To Originate (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.128. 128. Tatiyasamudayadhammasutta  - 128. Liable To Originate (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Avijjāvagga  - 13. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca sāriputto āyasmā ca mahākoṭṭhiko bārāṇasiyaṃ viharanti isipatane migadāye … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita were staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā mahākoṭṭhiko āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahākoṭṭhita said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘vijjā, vijjā’ti, āvuso sāriputta, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, they speak of this thing called ‘knowledge’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, āvuso, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a knowledgeable person defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso, sutavā ariyasāvako samudayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ ‘samudayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; vayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ … pe … samudayavayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ ‘samudayavayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, it’s when an educated noble disciple truly understands form, which is liable to originate … liable to vanish … liable to originate and vanish, as form which is liable to originate and vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayadhammaṃ vedanaṃ … pe … samudayavayadhammā vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayadhammaṃ saññaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayadhamme saṅkhāre … vayadhamme saṅkhāre … samudayavayadhamme saṅkhāre ‘samudayavayadhammā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ … vayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ … samudayavayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘samudayavayadhammaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, which is liable to originate … liable to vanish … liable to originate and vanish, as consciousness which is liable to originate and vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccatāvuso, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how a knowledgeable person is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
