<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.003-3. Hāliddikānisutta  - 3. With Hāliddikāni </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.003. 3. Hāliddikānisutta  - 3. With Hāliddikāni </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nakulapituvagga  - 1. Nakula’s Father </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"> ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā mahākaccāno avantīsu viharati kuraraghare papāte pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land of the Avantis near Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho hāliddikāni gahapati yenāyasmā mahākaccāno tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ mahākaccānaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho hāliddikāni gahapati āyasmantaṃ mahākaccānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Hāliddikāni went up to Venerable Mahākaccāna, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vuttamidaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā aṭṭhakavaggiye māgaṇḍiyapañhe: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, this was said by the Buddha in the Chapter of the Eights, in ‘The Questions of Māgandiya’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Okaṃ pahāya aniketasārī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘After leaving shelter to become an unsettled migrant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāme akubbaṃ muni santhavāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a sage doesn’t get close to anyone in town. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmehi ritto apurakkharāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rid of sensual pleasures, expecting nothing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ na viggayha janena kayirā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t argue with anyone.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa nu kho, bhante, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa kathaṃ vitthārena attho daṭṭhabbo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How should we see the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpadhātu kho, gahapati, viññāṇassa oko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, the form element is a shelter for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhāturāgavinibandhañca pana viññāṇaṃ ‘okasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One whose consciousness is shackled to greed for the form element is called a migrant going from shelter to shelter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanādhātu kho, gahapati, viññāṇassa oko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The feeling element is a shelter for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanādhāturāgavinibandhañca pana viññāṇaṃ ‘okasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One whose consciousness is attached to greed for the feeling element is called a migrant going from shelter to shelter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññādhātu kho, gahapati, viññāṇassa oko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The perception element is a shelter for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññādhāturāgavinibandhañca pana viññāṇaṃ ‘okasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One whose consciousness is attached to greed for the perception element is called a migrant going from shelter to shelter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhāradhātu kho, gahapati, viññāṇassa oko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The choices element is a shelter for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhāradhāturāgavinibandhañca pana viññāṇaṃ ‘okasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One whose consciousness is attached to greed for the choices element is called a migrant going from shelter to shelter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, okasārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one is a migrant going from shelter to shelter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, anokasārī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is one a migrant without a shelter? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātuyā kho, gahapati, yo chando yo rāgo yā nandī yā taṇhā ye upayupādānā cetaso adhiṭṭhānābhinivesānusayā te tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṃkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has given up any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for the form element; any attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendencies. He has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā tathāgato ‘anokasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the Realized One is called a migrant without a shelter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanādhātuyā kho, gahapati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has given up any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for the feeling element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññādhātuyā kho, gahapati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the perception element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāradhātuyā kho, gahapati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the choices element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇadhātuyā kho, gahapati, yo chando yo rāgo yā nandī yā taṇhā ye upayupādānā cetaso adhiṭṭhānābhinivesānusayā te tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṃkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the consciousness element; any attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendencies. He has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā tathāgato ‘anokasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the Realized One is called a migrant without a shelter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, anokasārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one is a migrant without a shelter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, niketasārī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is one a migrant going from settlement to settlement? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpanimittaniketavisāravinibandhā kho, gahapati, ‘niketasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being attached to migrating from settlement to settlement in pursuit of sights, one is called a migrant going from settlement to settlement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddanimitta … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being attached to migrating from settlement to settlement in pursuit of sounds … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gandhanimitta … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rasanimitta … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phoṭṭhabbanimitta … </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammanimittaniketavisāravinibandhā kho, gahapati, ‘niketasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts, one is called a migrant going from settlement to settlement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, niketasārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one is a migrant going from settlement to settlement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, aniketasārī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is one an unsettled migrant? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpanimittaniketavisāravinibandhā kho, gahapati, tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has given up attachment to migrating from settlement to settlement in pursuit of sights. He has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā tathāgato ‘aniketasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the Realized One is called an unsettled migrant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddanimitta … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has given up attachment to migrating from settlement to settlement in pursuit of sounds … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gandhanimitta … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rasanimitta … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phoṭṭhabbanimitta … </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammanimittaniketavisāravinibandhā kho, gahapati, tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts. He has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā tathāgato ‘aniketasārī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the Realized One is called an unsettled migrant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, aniketasārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one is an unsettled migrant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, gāme santhavajāto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one get close to people in town? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ekacco gihīhi saṃsaṭṭho viharati sahanandī sahasokī, sukhitesu sukhito, dukkhitesu dukkhito, uppannesu kiccakaraṇīyesu attanā tesu yogaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone mixes closely with laypeople, sharing their joys and sorrows—happy when they’re happy and sad when they’re sad—and getting involved in their business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, gāme santhavajāto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one gets close to people in town. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, gāme na santhavajāto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one not get close to people in town? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, bhikkhu gihīhi asaṃsaṭṭho viharati na sahanandī na sahasokī na sukhitesu sukhito na dukkhitesu dukkhito, uppannesu kiccakaraṇīyesu na attanā tesu yogaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t mix closely with laypeople, not sharing their joys and sorrows—not happy when they’re happy or sad when they’re sad—and not getting involved in their business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, gāme na santhavajāto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one doesn’t get close to people in town. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, kāmehi aritto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is one not rid of sensual pleasures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ekacco kāmesu avigatarāgo hoti avigatacchando avigatapemo avigatapipāso avigatapariḷāho avigatataṇho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone isn’t rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, kāmehi aritto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one is not rid of sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, kāmehi ritto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is one rid of sensual pleasures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ekacco kāmesu vigatarāgo hoti vigatacchando vigatapemo vigatapipāso vigatapariḷāho vigatataṇho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone is rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, kāmehi ritto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one is rid of sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, purakkharāno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one have expectations? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ekaccassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃrūpo siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃvedano siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃsañño siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃsaṅkhāro siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃviññāṇo siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In the future, may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such choices, and such consciousness!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, purakkharāno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one has expectations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, apurakkharāno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one expect nothing? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ekaccassa na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone doesn’t think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃrūpo siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃvedano siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃsañño siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃsaṅkhāro siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃviññāṇo siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In the future, may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such choices, and such consciousness!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, apurakkharāno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one expects nothing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, kathaṃ viggayha janena kattā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one argue with people? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ekacco evarūpiṃ kathaṃ kattā hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone takes part in this sort of discussion: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na tvaṃ imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ ājānāsi; ahaṃ imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ ājānāmi. Kiṃ tvaṃ imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ ājānissasi? Micchāpaṭipanno tvamasi; ahamasmi sammāpaṭipanno. Pure vacanīyaṃ pacchā avaca; pacchā vacanīyaṃ pure avaca. Sahitaṃ me, asahitaṃ te. Adhiciṇṇaṃ te viparāvattaṃ. Āropito te vādo; cara vādappamokkhāya. Niggahitosi; nibbeṭhehi vā sace pahosī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. I stay on topic, you don’t. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, kathaṃ viggayha janena kattā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one argues with people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, gahapati, kathaṃ na viggayha janena kattā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one not argue with people? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, bhikkhu na evarūpiṃ kathaṃ kattā hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t take part in this sort of discussion: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na tvaṃ imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ ājānāsi … pe … nibbeṭhehi vā sace pahosī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You don’t understand this teaching and training … get yourself out of this—if you can!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, kathaṃ na viggayha janena kattā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one doesn’t argue with people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, gahapati, yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā aṭṭhakavaggiye māgaṇḍiyapañhe: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, householder, that’s how to understand the detailed meaning of what the Buddha said in brief in the Chapter of the Eights, in ‘The Questions of Māgandiya’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Okaṃ pahāya aniketasārī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘After leaving shelter to become an unsettled migrant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāme akubbaṃ munisanthavāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a sage doesn’t get close to anyone in town. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmehi ritto apurakkharāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rid of sensual pleasures, expecting nothing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ na viggayha janena kayirā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t argue with anyone.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, gahapati, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṃ vitthārena attho daṭṭhabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
