<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.079-79. Khajjanīyasutta  - 79. Itchy </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.079. 79. Khajjanīyasutta  - 79. Itchy </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Khajjanīyavagga  - 8. Itchy </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussaramānā anussaranti sabbete pañcupādānakkhandhe anussaranti etesaṃ vā aññataraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, whatever ascetics and brahmins recollect many kinds of past lives, all recollect the five grasping aggregates, or one of them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃrūpo ahosiṃ atītamaddhānan’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I had such form in the past.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vā hi, bhikkhave, anussaramāno rūpaṃyeva anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting thus, it’s only form that they recollect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃvedano ahosiṃ atītamaddhānan’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I had such feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vā hi, bhikkhave, anussaramāno vedanaṃyeva anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃsañño ahosiṃ atītamaddhānan’ti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsaṅkhāro ahosiṃ atītamaddhānan’ti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃviññāṇo ahosiṃ atītamaddhānan’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness in the past.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vā hi, bhikkhave, anussaramāno viññāṇameva anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting thus, it’s only consciousness that they recollect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ vadetha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why do you call it form? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ruppatīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘rūpan’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s deformed; that’s why it’s called ‘form’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kena ruppati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Deformed by what? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sītenapi ruppati, uṇhenapi ruppati, jighacchāyapi ruppati, pipāsāyapi ruppati, ḍaṃsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassenapi ruppati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Deformed by cold, heat, hunger, and thirst, and deformed by the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ruppatīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘rūpan’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s deformed; that’s why it’s called ‘form’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, vedanaṃ vadetha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why do you call it feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedayatīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘vedanā’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It feels; that’s why it’s called ‘feeling’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca vedayati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does it feel? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhampi vedayati, dukkhampi vedayati, adukkhamasukhampi vedayati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It feels pleasure, pain, and neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedayatīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘vedanā’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It feels; that’s why it’s called ‘feeling’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, saññaṃ vadetha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why do you call it perception? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañjānātīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘saññā’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It perceives; that’s why it’s called ‘perception’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca sañjānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does it perceive? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nīlampi sañjānāti, pītakampi sañjānāti, lohitakampi sañjānāti, odātampi sañjānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It perceives blue, yellow, red, and white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañjānātīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘saññā’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It perceives; that’s why it’s called ‘perception’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, saṅkhāre vadetha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why do you call them choices? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhatamabhisaṅkharontīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘saṅkhārā’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices produce conditioned phenomena; that’s why they’re called ‘choices’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca saṅkhatamabhisaṅkharonti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the conditioned phenomena that they produce? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ rūpattāya saṅkhatamabhisaṅkharonti, vedanaṃ vedanattāya saṅkhatamabhisaṅkharonti, saññaṃ saññattāya saṅkhatamabhisaṅkharonti, saṅkhāre saṅkhārattāya saṅkhatamabhisaṅkharonti, viññāṇaṃ viññāṇattāya saṅkhatamabhisaṅkharonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form is a conditioned phenomenon; choices are what make it into form. Feeling is a conditioned phenomenon; choices are what make it into feeling. Perception is a conditioned phenomenon; choices are what make it into perception. Choices are conditioned phenomena; choices are what make them into choices. Consciousness is a conditioned phenomenon; choices are what make it into consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhatamabhisaṅkharontīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘saṅkhārā’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices produce conditioned phenomena; that’s why they’re called ‘choices’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ vadetha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why do you call it consciousness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijānātīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘viññāṇan’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It cognizes; that’s why it’s called ‘consciousness’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca vijānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does it cognize? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ambilampi vijānāti, tittakampi vijānāti, kaṭukampi vijānāti, madhurampi vijānāti, khārikampi vijānāti, akhārikampi vijānāti, loṇikampi vijānāti, aloṇikampi vijānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It cognizes sour, bitter, pungent, sweet, hot, mild, salty, and bland. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijānātīti kho, bhikkhave, tasmā ‘viññāṇan’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It cognizes; that’s why it’s called ‘consciousness’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple reflects on this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ kho etarahi rūpena khajjāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Currently I’m itched by form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atītampāhaṃ addhānaṃ evameva rūpena khajjiṃ, seyyathāpi etarahi paccuppannena rūpena khajjāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past I was also itched by form just like now. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana anāgataṃ rūpaṃ abhinandeyyaṃ, anāgatampāhaṃ addhānaṃ evameva rūpena khajjeyyaṃ, seyyathāpi etarahi paccuppannena rūpena khajjāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to look forward to enjoying form in the future, I’d be itched by form in the future just as I am today.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya atītasmiṃ rūpasmiṃ anapekkho hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this they don’t worry about past form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgataṃ rūpaṃ nābhinandati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t look forward to enjoying future form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccuppannassa rūpassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ahaṃ kho etarahi vedanāya khajjāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Currently I’m itched by feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atītampāhaṃ addhānaṃ evameva vedanāya khajjiṃ, seyyathāpi etarahi paccuppannāya vedanāya khajjāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana anāgataṃ vedanaṃ abhinandeyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgatampāhaṃ addhānaṃ evameva vedanāya khajjeyyaṃ, seyyathāpi etarahi paccuppannāya vedanāya khajjāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya atītāya vedanāya anapekkho hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgataṃ vedanaṃ nābhinandati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccuppannāya vedanāya nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ahaṃ kho etarahi saññāya khajjāmi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahaṃ kho etarahi saṅkhārehi khajjāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atītampāhaṃ addhānaṃ evameva saṅkhārehi khajjiṃ, seyyathāpi etarahi paccuppannehi saṅkhārehi khajjāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana anāgate saṅkhāre abhinandeyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgatampāhaṃ addhānaṃ evameva saṅkhārehi khajjeyyaṃ, seyyathāpi etarahi paccuppannehi saṅkhārehi khajjāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya atītesu saṅkhāresu anapekkho hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgate saṅkhāre nābhinandati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccuppannānaṃ saṅkhārānaṃ nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ahaṃ kho etarahi viññāṇena khajjāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atītampi addhānaṃ evameva viññāṇena khajjiṃ, seyyathāpi etarahi paccuppannena viññāṇena khajjāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past I was also itched by consciousness just like now. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana anāgataṃ viññāṇaṃ abhinandeyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to look forward to enjoying consciousness in the future, I’d be itched by consciousness in the future just as I am today.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgatampāhaṃ addhānaṃ evameva viññāṇena khajjeyyaṃ, seyyathāpi etarahi paccuppannena viññāṇena khajjāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya atītasmiṃ viññāṇasmiṃ anapekkho hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this they don’t worry about past consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgataṃ viññāṇaṃ nābhinandati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t look forward to enjoying future consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccuppannassa viññāṇassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suffering, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suffering, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, yaṃ kiñci rūpaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā, sabbaṃ rūpaṃ: ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So you should truly see any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should truly see any kind of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ … pe … yaṃ dūre santike vā, sabbaṃ viññāṇaṃ: ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako apacināti, no ācināti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a noble disciple who gets rid of things and doesn’t accumulate them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pajahati, na upādiyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who gives things up and doesn’t grasp at them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">visineti, na ussineti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who discards things and doesn’t amass them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vidhūpeti, na sandhūpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who dissipates things and doesn’t get clouded by them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca apacināti, no ācināti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what things do they get rid of and not accumulate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ apacināti, no ācināti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get rid of form and don’t accumulate it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get rid of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ apacināti, no ācināti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness and don’t accumulate it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca pajahati, na upādiyati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what things do they give up and not grasp? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ pajahati, na upādiyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up form and don’t grasp it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ pajahati, na upādiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness and don’t grasp it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca visineti, na ussineti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what things do they discard and not amass? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ visineti, na ussineti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They discard form and don’t amass it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They discard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ visineti, na ussineti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness and don’t amass it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca vidhūpeti, na sandhūpeti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what things do they dissipate and not get clouded by? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ vidhūpeti, na sandhūpeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They dissipate form and don’t get clouded by it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They dissipate feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ vidhūpeti, na sandhūpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness and don’t get clouded by it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpasmimpi nibbindati, vedanāyapi … saññāyapi … saṅkhāresupi … viññāṇasmimpi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati. Vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nevācināti na apacināti, apacinitvā ṭhito; neva pajahati na upādiyati, pajahitvā ṭhito; neva visineti na ussineti, visinetvā ṭhito; neva vidhūpeti na sandhūpeti vidhūpetvā ṭhito </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a mendicant who neither gets rid of things nor accumulates them, but remains after getting rid of them. They neither give things up nor grasp them, but remain after giving them up. They neither discard things nor amass them, but remain after discarding them. They neither dissipate things nor get clouded by them, but remain after dissipating them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca nevācināti na apacināti, apacinitvā ṭhito? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what things do they neither get rid of nor accumulate, but remain after getting rid of them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ nevācināti na apacināti, apacinitvā ṭhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neither get rid of nor accumulate form, but remain after getting rid of it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neither get rid of nor accumulate feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ nevācināti na apacināti, apacinitvā ṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, but remain after getting rid of it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca neva pajahati na upādiyati, pajahitvā ṭhito? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what things do they neither give up nor grasp, but remain after giving them up? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ neva pajahati na upādiyati, pajahitvā ṭhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neither give up nor grasp form, but remain after giving it up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neither give up nor grasp feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ neva pajahati na upādiyati, pajahitvā ṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, but remain after giving it up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca neva visineti na ussineti, visinetvā ṭhito? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what things do they neither discard nor amass, but remain after discarding them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ neva visineti na ussineti, visinetvā ṭhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neither discard nor amass form, but remain after discarding it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neither discard nor amass feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ neva visineti na ussineti, visinetvā ṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, but remain after discarding it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca neva vidhūpeti na sandhūpeti, vidhūpetvā ṭhito? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what things do they neither dissipate nor get clouded by, but remain after dissipating them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ neva vidhūpeti na sandhūpeti, vidhūpetvā ṭhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neither dissipate nor get clouded by form, but remain after dissipating it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neither dissipate nor get clouded by feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ neva vidhūpeti na sandhūpeti, vidhūpetvā ṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, but remain after dissipating it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃvimuttacittaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṃ saindā devā sabrahmakā sapajāpatikā ārakāva namassanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant’s mind is freed like this, the gods together with Indra, Brahmā, and Pajāpati worship them from afar: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Namo te purisājañña, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Homage to you, O thoroughbred! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">namo te purisuttama; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Homage to you, supreme among men! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa te nābhijānāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We don’t understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampi nissāya jhāyasī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the basis of your absorption.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
