<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.080-80. Piṇḍolyasutta  - 80. Beggars </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.080. 80. Piṇḍolyasutta  - 80. Beggars </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Khajjanīyavagga  - 8. Itchy </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ nigrodhārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā kismiñcideva pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paṇāmetvā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya kapilavatthuṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, having dismissed the mendicant Saṅgha for some reason, robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Kapilavatthu for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kapilavatthusmiṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto yena mahāvanaṃ tenupasaṅkami divāvihārāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu. After the meal, on his return from alms-round, he went to the Great Wood, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāvanaṃ ajjhogāhetvā beluvalaṭṭhikāya mūle divāvihāraṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">plunged deep into it, and sat at the root of a young wood apple tree for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mayā kho bhikkhusaṅgho pabāḷho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve sent the mendicant Saṅgha away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santettha bhikkhū navā acirapabbajitā adhunāgatā imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there are mendicants here who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ mamaṃ apassantānaṃ siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not seeing me they may change and fall apart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma vacchassa taruṇassa mātaraṃ apassantassa siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a young calf doesn’t see its mother it may change and fall apart. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva santettha bhikkhū navā acirapabbajitā adhunāgatā imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ tesaṃ mamaṃ apassantānaṃ siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma bījānaṃ taruṇānaṃ udakaṃ alabhantānaṃ siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or if young seedlings don’t get water they may change and fall apart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva santettha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are mendicants here who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṃ mamaṃ alabhantānaṃ dassanāya siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not seeing me they may change and fall apart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ yatheva mayā pubbe bhikkhusaṅgho anuggahito, evameva etarahi anuggaṇheyyaṃ bhikkhusaṅghan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I support the mendicant Saṅgha now as I did in the past?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati bhagavato cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya—seyyathāpi nāma balavā puriso samiñjitaṃ vā bāhaṃ pasāreyya pasāritaṃ vā bāhaṃ samiñjeyya; evameva—brahmaloke antarahito bhagavato purato pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmā Sahampati knew what the Buddha was thinking. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the Brahmā realm and reappeared in front of the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“evametaṃ, bhagavā, evametaṃ, sugata. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavatā, bhante, bhikkhusaṃgho pabāḷho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has sent the mendicant Saṅgha away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santettha bhikkhū navā acirapabbajitā adhunāgatā imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there are mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ bhagavantaṃ apassantānaṃ siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma vacchassa taruṇassa mātaraṃ apassantassa siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva santettha bhikkhū navā acirapabbajitā adhunāgatā imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ tesaṃ bhagavantaṃ apassantānaṃ siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma bījānaṃ taruṇānaṃ udakaṃ alabhantānaṃ siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva santettha bhikkhū navā acirapabbajitā adhunāgatā imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ, tesaṃ bhagavantaṃ alabhantānaṃ dassanāya siyā aññathattaṃ siyā vipariṇāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinandatu, bhante, bhagavā bhikkhusaṃghaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Buddha be happy with the mendicant Saṅgha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhivadatu, bhante, bhagavā bhikkhusaṃghaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Buddha welcome the mendicant Saṅgha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatheva bhagavatā pubbe bhikkhusaṃgho anuggahito, evameva etarahi anuggaṇhātu bhikkhusaṃghan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Buddha support the mendicant Saṅgha now as he did in the past!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati bhagavato adhivāsanaṃ viditvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmā Sahampati, knowing that the Buddha had consented, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena nigrodhārāmo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the Banyan Tree Monastery, where he sat on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā tathārūpaṃ iddhābhisaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkhāsi yathā te bhikkhū ekadvīhikāya sārajjamānarūpā yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkameyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he used his psychic power to will that the mendicants would come to him timidly, alone or in pairs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tepi bhikkhū ekadvīhikāya sārajjamānarūpā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinne kho te bhikkhū bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those mendicants approached the Buddha timidly, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Antamidaṃ, bhikkhave, jīvikānaṃ yadidaṃ piṇḍolyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this relying on alms is an extreme way to live. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhisāpoyaṃ, bhikkhave, lokasmiṃ piṇḍolo vicarasi pattapāṇīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The world curses you: ‘You beggar, walking bowl in hand!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, kulaputtā upenti atthavasikā, atthavasaṃ paṭicca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet earnest and gentlemen take it up for a good reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">neva rājābhinītā, na corābhinītā, na iṇaṭṭā, na bhayaṭṭā, na ājīvikāpakatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not because they’ve been forced to by kings or bandits, or because they’re in debt or threatened, or to earn a living. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ca kho otiṇṇāmha jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi dukkhotiṇṇā dukkhaparetā </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because they’re swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They’re swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they think, ‘Hopefully I can find an end to this entire mass of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ pabbajito cāyaṃ, bhikkhave, kulaputto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how this gentleman has gone forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca hoti abhijjhālu kāmesu tibbasārāgo byāpannacitto paduṭṭhamanasaṅkappo muṭṭhassati asampajāno asamāhito vibbhantacitto pākatindriyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet they covet sensual pleasures; they’re infatuated, full of ill will and hateful intent. They are unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, chavālātaṃ ubhatopadittaṃ majjhe gūthagataṃ, neva gāme kaṭṭhatthaṃ pharati, nāraññe kaṭṭhatthaṃ pharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a firebrand for lighting a funeral pyre, burning at both ends, and smeared with dung in the middle. It couldn’t be used as timber either in the village or the wilderness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi gihibhogā ca parihīno, sāmaññatthañca na paripūreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that person is just like this. They’ve missed out on the pleasures of the lay life, and haven’t fulfilled the goal of the ascetic life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayome, bhikkhave, akusalavitakkā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these three unskillful thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmavitakko, byāpādavitakko, vihiṃsāvitakko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime ca bhikkhave, tayo akusalavitakkā kva aparisesā nirujjhanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And where do these three unskillful thoughts cease without anything left over? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūsu vā satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacittassa viharato animittaṃ vā samādhiṃ bhāvayato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In those who meditate with their mind firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation; or who develop signless immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvañcidaṃ, bhikkhave, alameva animitto samādhi bhāvetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just this much is quite enough motivation to develop signless immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Animitto, bhikkhave, samādhi bhāvito bahulīkato mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When signless immersion is developed and cultivated it is very fruitful and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvemā, bhikkhave, diṭṭhiyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these two views. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavadiṭṭhi ca vibhavadiṭṭhi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Views favoring continued existence and views favoring ending existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple reflects on this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi nu kho taṃ kiñci lokasmiṃ yamahaṃ upādiyamāno na vajjavā assan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Is there anything in the world that I could grasp without fault?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi nu kho taṃ kiñci lokasmiṃ yamahaṃ upādiyamāno na vajjavā assaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There’s nothing in the world that I could grasp without fault. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi rūpaññeva upādiyamāno upādiyeyyaṃ vedanaññeva … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For in grasping I would grasp only at form, feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaññeva … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāreyeva viññāṇaññeva upādiyamāno upādiyeyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, or consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa me assa upādānapaccayā bhavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That grasping of mine would be a condition for continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavapaccayā jāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhaveyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is a condition that gives rise to old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo assā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suffering, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness permanent or impermanent?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmātiha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So you should truly see … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ passaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
