<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.035-35. Aññatarabhikkhusutta  - 35. A Mendicant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.035. 35. Aññatarabhikkhusutta  - 35. A Mendicant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Natumhākavagga  - 4. It’s Not Yours </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṃkhittena dhammaṃ desetu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho, appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, bhikkhu, anuseti, tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, you’re defined by what you have an underlying tendency for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ nānuseti, na tena saṅkhaṃ gacchatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re not defined by what you have no underlying tendency for.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātaṃ, bhagavā, aññātaṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpañce, bhante, anuseti tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If you have an underlying tendency for form, you’re defined by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanañce anuseti tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have an underlying tendency for feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññañce anuseti tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhāre ce anuseti tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇañce anuseti tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, you’re defined by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpañce, bhante, nānuseti na tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have no underlying tendency for form, you’re not defined by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanañce … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have no underlying tendency for feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññañce … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre ce … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇañce nānuseti na tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, you’re not defined by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṃ vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, mendicant! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good that you understand the detailed meaning of what I’ve said in brief like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpañce, bhikkhu, anuseti tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have an underlying tendency for form, you’re defined by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanañce … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have an underlying tendency for feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññañce … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre ce … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇañce anuseti tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, you’re defined by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpañce, bhikkhu, nānuseti na tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have no underlying tendency for form, you’re not defined by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanañce … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have no underlying tendency for feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññañce … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre ce … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇañce nānuseti na tena saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, you’re not defined by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhittena, bhāsitassa evaṃ vitthārena attho daṭṭhabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto viharanto nacirasseva—yassatthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṃ—brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā”ti abbhaññāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is no return to any state of existence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro ca pana so bhikkhu arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that mendicant became one of the perfected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
