<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.099-99. Gaddulabaddhasutta  - 99. A Leash </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.099. 99. Gaddulabaddhasutta  - 99. A Leash </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Pupphavagga  - 10. Flowers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, transmigration has no known beginning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbā koṭi na paññāyati avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hoti so, bhikkhave, samayo yaṃ mahāsamuddo ussussati visussati na bhavati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There comes a time when the ocean dries up and evaporates and is no more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na tvevāhaṃ, bhikkhave, avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ dukkhassa antakiriyaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But still, I say, there is no making an end of suffering for sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hoti so, bhikkhave, samayo yaṃ sineru pabbatarājā ḍayhati vinassati na bhavati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There comes a time when Sineru the king of mountains is burned up and destroyed, and is no more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na tvevāhaṃ, bhikkhave, avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ dukkhassa antakiriyaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But still, I say, there is no making an end of suffering for sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hoti so, bhikkhave, samayo yaṃ mahāpathavī ḍayhati vinassati na bhavati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There comes a time when the great earth is burned up and destroyed, and is no more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na tvevāhaṃ, bhikkhave, avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ dukkhassa antakiriyaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But still, I say, there is no making an end of suffering for sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, sā gaddulabaddho daḷhe khīle vā thambhe vā upanibaddho tameva khīlaṃ vā thambhaṃ vā anuparidhāvati anuparivattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a dog on a leash was tethered to a strong post or pillar. It would just keep running and circling around that post or pillar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṃ adassāvī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, take an uneducated ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in their teaching. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in their teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappurisadhamme avinīto rūpaṃ attato samanupassati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ attato samanupassati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ attato samanupassati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre attato samanupassati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati, viññāṇavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; attani vā viññāṇaṃ, viññāṇasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So rūpaññeva anuparidhāvati anuparivattati, vedanaññeva … pe … saññaññeva … saṅkhāreyeva … viññāṇaññeva anuparidhāvati anuparivattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They just keep running and circling around form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So rūpaṃ anuparidhāvaṃ anuparivattaṃ, vedanaṃ … pe … saññaṃ … saṅkhāre … viññāṇaṃ anuparidhāvaṃ anuparivattaṃ, na parimuccati rūpamhā, na parimuccati vedanāya, na parimuccati saññāya, na parimuccati saṅkhārehi, na parimuccati viññāṇamhā, na parimuccati jātiyā jarāmaraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Doing so, they’re not freed from form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. They’re not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Na parimuccati dukkhasmā’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not freed from suffering, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutavā ca kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ariyānaṃ dassāvī … pe … sappurisadhamme suvinīto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An educated noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na rūpaṃ attato samanupassati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati, na viññāṇavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; na attani vā viññāṇaṃ, na viññāṇasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So rūpaṃ nānuparidhāvati nānuparivattati, vedanaṃ … saññaṃ … saṅkhāre … viññāṇaṃ nānuparidhāvati nānuparivattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t keep running and circling around form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So rūpaṃ ananuparidhāvaṃ ananuparivattaṃ, vedanaṃ … saññaṃ … saṅkhāre … viññāṇaṃ ananuparidhāvaṃ ananuparivattaṃ; parimuccati rūpamhā, parimuccati vedanāya, parimuccati saññāya, parimuccati saṅkhārehi, parimuccati viññāṇamhā, parimuccati jātiyā jarāmaraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By not doing so, they’re freed from form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. They’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Parimuccati dukkhasmā’ti vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re freed from suffering, I say.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
