<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.069-69. Anattaniyasutta  - 69. Not Belonging to Self </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.069. 69. Anattaniyasutta  - 69. Not Belonging to Self </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Arahantavagga  - 7. The Perfected Ones </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṃ desetu … pe … vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, bhikkhu, anattaniyaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, give up desire for anything that doesn’t belong to self.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātaṃ, bhagavā, aññātaṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpaṃ kho, bhante, anattaniyaṃ; tatra me chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, form doesn’t belong to self; I should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ anattaniyaṃ; tatra me chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness doesn’t belong to self; I should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṃ vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, mendicant! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good that you understand the detailed meaning of what I’ve said in brief like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ kho, bhikkhu, anattaniyaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form doesn’t belong to self; you should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ anattaniyaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness doesn’t belong to self; you should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṃ vitthārena attho daṭṭhabbo”ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññataro ca pana so bhikkhu arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that mendicant became one of the perfected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
