<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.094-94. Pupphasutta  - 94. Flowers </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.094. 94. Pupphasutta  - 94. Flowers </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Pupphavagga  - 10. Flowers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, lokena vivadāmi, lokova mayā vivadati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I don’t argue with the world; it’s the world that argues with me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, dhammavādī kenaci lokasmiṃ vivadati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When your speech is in line with the teaching you don’t argue with anyone in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, natthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ, ahampi taṃ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What the astute agree on as not existing, I too say does not exist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, atthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ, ahampi taṃ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What the astute agree on as existing, I too say exists. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, natthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ, yamahaṃ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what do the astute agree on as not existing, which I too say does not exist? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ, bhikkhave, niccaṃ dhuvaṃ sassataṃ avipariṇāmadhammaṃ natthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ; ahampi taṃ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form that is permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ dhuvaṃ sassataṃ avipariṇāmadhammaṃ natthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ; ahampi taṃ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness that is permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho, bhikkhave, natthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ; ahampi taṃ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is what the astute agree on as not existing, which I too say does not exist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, atthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ, yamahaṃ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what do the astute agree on as existing, which I too say exists? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ atthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ; ahampi taṃ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form that is impermanent, suffering, and perishable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā aniccā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling … Perception … Choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ atthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ; ahampi taṃ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness that is impermanent, suffering, and perishable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho, bhikkhave, atthisammataṃ loke paṇḍitānaṃ; ahampi taṃ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is what the astute agree on as existing, which I too say exists. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo, taṃ tathāgato abhisambujjhati abhisameti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a temporal phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and comprehends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhisambujjhitvā abhisametvā taṃ ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo, taṃ tathāgato abhisambujjhati abhisameti, abhisambujjhitvā abhisametvā ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is that temporal phenomenon in the world? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo taṃ tathāgato abhisambujjhati abhisameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form is a temporal phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and comprehends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhisambujjhitvā abhisametvā ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, bhikkhave, tathāgatena evaṃ ācikkhiyamāne desiyamāne paññapiyamāne paṭṭhapiyamāne vivariyamāne vibhajiyamāne uttānīkariyamāne na jānāti na passati tamahaṃ, bhikkhave, bālaṃ puthujjanaṃ andhaṃ acakkhukaṃ ajānantaṃ apassantaṃ kinti karomi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, what can I do about a foolish ordinary person, blind and sightless, who does not know or see? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā, bhikkhave … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā, bhikkhave … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo taṃ tathāgato abhisambujjhati abhisameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is a temporal phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and comprehends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhisambujjhitvā abhisametvā ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, bhikkhave, tathāgatena evaṃ ācikkhiyamāne desiyamāne paññapiyamāne paṭṭhapiyamāne vivariyamāne vibhajiyamāne uttānīkariyamāne na jānāti na passati tamahaṃ, bhikkhave, bālaṃ puthujjanaṃ andhaṃ acakkhukaṃ ajānantaṃ apassantaṃ kinti karomi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, what can I do about a foolish ordinary person, blind and sightless, who does not know or see? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uppalaṃ vā padumaṃ vā puṇḍarīkaṃ vā udake jātaṃ udake saṃvaḍḍhaṃ udakā accuggamma ṭhāti anupalittaṃ udakena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a blue water lily, or a pink or white lotus. Though it sprouted and grew in the water, it would rise up above the water and stand with no water clinging to it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, tathāgato loke jāto loke saṃvaḍḍho lokaṃ abhibhuyya viharati anupalitto lokenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, though I was born and grew up in the world, I live having mastered the world, and the world does not cling to me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
