<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.127-127. Dutiyasamudayadhammasutta  - 127. Liable To Originate (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.127. 127. Dutiyasamudayadhammasutta  - 127. Liable To Originate (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Avijjāvagga  - 13. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca sāriputto āyasmā ca mahākoṭṭhiko bārāṇasiyaṃ viharanti isipatane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita were staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahākoṭṭhiko sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā mahākoṭṭhiko āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahākoṭṭhita said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘avijjā, avijjā’ti, āvuso sāriputta, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, they speak of this thing called ‘ignorance’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, āvuso, avijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is ignorance? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā ca avijjāgato hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is an ignorant person defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso assutavā puthujjano samudayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ ‘samudayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; vayadhammaṃ rūpaṃ … pe … ‘samudayavayadhammaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, it’s when an uneducated ordinary person doesn’t truly understand form, which is liable to originate … liable to vanish … liable to originate and vanish, as form which is liable to originate and vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ vedanaṃ … pe … vayadhammaṃ vedanaṃ … pe … ‘samudayavayadhammā vedanā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ saññaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samudayadhamme saṅkhāre … pe … vayadhamme saṅkhāre … pe … samudayavayadhamme saṅkhāre ‘samudayavayadhammā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ … pe … samudayavayadhammaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘samudayavayadhammaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, which is liable to originate … liable to vanish … liable to originate and vanish, as consciousness which is liable to originate and vanish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, āvuso, avijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā ca avijjāgato hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how an ignorant person is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
