<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.158-158. Dutiyaabhinivesasutta  - 158. Insistence (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.158. 158. Dutiyaabhinivesasutta  - 158. Insistence (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Diṭṭhivagga  - 15. Views </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kismiṃ nu kho, bhikkhave, sati, kiṃ upādāya, kiṃ abhinivissa uppajjanti saṃyojanābhinivesavinibandhājjhosānā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on what, do fetters, insistence, shackles, and attachments arise?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“rūpe kho, bhikkhave, sati, rūpaṃ upādāya, rūpaṃ abhinivissa uppajjanti saṃyojanābhinivesavinibandhājjhosānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, fetters, insistence, shackles, and attachments arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe sati, viññāṇaṃ upādāya, viññāṇaṃ abhinivissa uppajjanti saṃyojanābhinivesavinibandhājjhosānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, fetters, insistence, shackles, and attachments arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api nu taṃ anupādāya uppajjeyyuṃ saṃyojanābhinivesavinibandhājjhosānā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would fetters, insistence, shackles, and attachments arise?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ passaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Seeing this … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
