<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.046-46. Dutiyaaniccasutta  - 46. Impermanence (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.046. 46. Dutiyaaniccasutta  - 46. Impermanence (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Attadīpavagga  - 5. Be Your Own Island </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpaṃ, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, form is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s impermanent is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s suffering is not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā aniccā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling is impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā aniccā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception is impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā aniccā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are impermanent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s impermanent is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s suffering is not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passato pubbantānudiṭṭhiyo na honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing truly with right understanding like this, they have no theories about the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbantānudiṭṭhīnaṃ asati, aparantānudiṭṭhiyo na honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not having theories about the past, they have no theories about the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparantānudiṭṭhīnaṃ asati, thāmaso parāmāso na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not having theories about the future, they don’t obstinately stick to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thāmase parāmāse asati rūpasmiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not misapprehending, the mind becomes dispassionate towards form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇasmiṃ cittaṃ virajjati vimuccati anupādāya āsavehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness; it’s freed from defilements by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttattā ṭhitaṃ. Ṭhitattā santusitaṃ. Santusitattā na paritassati. Aparitassaṃ paccattaññeva parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being free, it’s stable. Being stable, it’s content. Being content, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
