<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.008-8. Dutiyaupādāparitassanāsutta  - 8. Anxiety Because of Grasping (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.008. 8. Dutiyaupādāparitassanāsutta  - 8. Anxiety Because of Grasping (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nakulapituvagga  - 1. Nakula’s Father </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Upādāparitassanañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi anupādāaparitassanañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you how grasping leads to anxiety, and how not grasping leads to freedom from anxiety. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañca, bhikkhave, upādāparitassanā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does grasping lead to anxiety? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano rūpaṃ ‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when an uneducated ordinary person regards form like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ rūpaṃ vipariṇamati aññathā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that form of theirs decays and perishes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa rūpavipariṇāmaññathābhāvā uppajjanti sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanaṃ etaṃ mama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ etaṃ mama … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre etaṃ mama … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ ‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ viññāṇaṃ vipariṇamati aññathā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa viññāṇavipariṇāmaññathābhāvā uppajjanti sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, upādāparitassanā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how grasping leads to anxiety. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, anupādāaparitassanā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does not grasping lead to freedom from anxiety? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpaṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when an educated noble disciple regards form like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ rūpaṃ vipariṇamati aññathā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When that form of theirs decays and perishes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa rūpavipariṇāmaññathābhāvā nuppajjanti sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it doesn’t give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanaṃ netaṃ mama … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ netaṃ mama … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre netaṃ mama … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ viññāṇaṃ vipariṇamati aññathā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa viññāṇavipariṇāmaññathābhāvā nuppajjanti sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it doesn’t give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, anupādāaparitassanā hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how not grasping leads to freedom from anxiety.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
