<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.055-55. Udānasutta  - 55. An Inspired Saying </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.055. 55. Udānasutta  - 55. An Inspired Saying </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Upayavagga  - 6. Involvement </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha was inspired to exclaim: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘no cassaṃ, no ca me siyā, nābhavissa, na me bhavissatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘It might not be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ adhimuccamāno bhikkhu chindeyya orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who makes such a resolution can cut off the five lower fetters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yathā kathaṃ pana, bhante, ‘no cassaṃ, no ca me siyā, nābhavissa, na me bhavissatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ adhimuccamāno bhikkhu chindeyya orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">can a mendicant who makes such a resolution cut off the five lower fetters?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṃ adassāvī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, take an uneducated ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in their teaching. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in their teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappurisadhamme avinīto rūpaṃ attato samanupassati, rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; attani vā rūpaṃ, rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati, viññāṇavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; attani vā viññāṇaṃ, viññāṇasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aniccaṃ rūpaṃ ‘aniccaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand form—which is impermanent—as impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aniccaṃ vedanaṃ ‘aniccā vedanā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aniccaṃ saññaṃ ‘aniccā saññā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anicce saṅkhāre ‘aniccā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aniccaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘aniccaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness—which is impermanent—as impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ rūpaṃ ‘dukkhaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand form—which is suffering—as suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhaṃ saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhe saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘dukkhaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness—which is suffering—as suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anattaṃ rūpaṃ ‘anattā rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand form—which is not-self—as not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattaṃ vedanaṃ ‘anattā vedanā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattaṃ saññaṃ ‘anattā saññā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatte saṅkhāre ‘anattā saṅkhārā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘anattā viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness—which is not-self—as not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhataṃ rūpaṃ ‘saṅkhataṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand form—which is conditioned—as conditioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhataṃ vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhataṃ saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhate saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhataṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘saṅkhataṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness—which is conditioned—as conditioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ vibhavissatīti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand that form will disappear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā vibhavissati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t truly understand that feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā vibhavissati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā vibhavissanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ vibhavissatīti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness will disappear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutavā ca kho, bhikkhu, ariyasāvako ariyānaṃ dassāvī ariyadhammassa kovido ariyadhamme suvinīto sappurisānaṃ dassāvī sappurisadhammassa kovido sappurisadhamme suvinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">But an educated noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na rūpaṃ attato samanupassati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard form as self … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness as self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aniccaṃ rūpaṃ ‘aniccaṃ rūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand form—which is impermanent—as impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccaṃ vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aniccaṃ saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anicce saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aniccaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘aniccaṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness—which is impermanent—as impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ rūpaṃ … pe … dukkhaṃ viññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand form … feeling … perception … choices … consciousness—which is suffering—as suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattaṃ rūpaṃ … pe … anattaṃ viññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand form … feeling … perception … choices … consciousness—which is not-self—as not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhataṃ rūpaṃ … pe … saṅkhataṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘saṅkhataṃ viññāṇan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand form … feeling … perception … choices … consciousness—which is conditioned—as conditioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ vibhavissatīti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand that form will disappear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand that feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ vibhavissatīti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness will disappear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So rūpassa vibhavā, vedanāya vibhavā, saññāya vibhavā, saṅkhārānaṃ vibhavā, viññāṇassa vibhavā, evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of the disappearance of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness that a mendicant who makes such a resolution—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘no cassaṃ, no ca me siyā, nābhavissa, na me bhavissatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It might not be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine’—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ adhimuccamāno bhikkhu chindeyya orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can cut off the five lower fetters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ adhimuccamāno, bhante, bhikkhu chindeyya orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, a mendicant who makes such a resolution can cut off the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ pana, bhante, jānato kathaṃ passato anantarā āsavānaṃ khayo hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">But how are they to know and see in order to end the defilements in the present life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, assutavā puthujjano atasitāye ṭhāne tāsaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, an uneducated ordinary person worries about things that aren’t a worry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāso heso bhikkhu assutavato puthujjanassa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For an uneducated ordinary person worries: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘no cassaṃ, no ca me siyā, nābhavissa, na me bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It might not be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutavā ca kho, bhikkhu, ariyasāvako atasitāye ṭhāne na tāsaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An educated noble disciple doesn’t worry about things that aren’t a worry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na heso, bhikkhu, tāso sutavato ariyasāvakassa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For an educated noble disciple doesn’t worry: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘no cassaṃ, no ca me siyā, nābhavissa, na me bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It might not be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpupayaṃ vā, bhikkhu, viññāṇaṃ tiṭṭhamānaṃ tiṭṭheyya, rūpārammaṇaṃ rūpappatiṭṭhaṃ nandūpasecanaṃ vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with form, supported by form, founded on form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanupayaṃ vā, bhikkhu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or consciousness would remain involved with feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññupayaṃ vā, bhikkhu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or consciousness would remain involved with perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārupayaṃ vā, bhikkhu, viññāṇaṃ tiṭṭhamānaṃ tiṭṭheyya, saṅkhārārammaṇaṃ saṅkhārappatiṭṭhaṃ nandūpasecanaṃ vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or consciousness would remain involved with choices, supported by choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, bhikkhu, evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, suppose you say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahamaññatra rūpā, aññatra vedanāya, aññatra saññāya, aññatra saṅkhārehi viññāṇassa āgatiṃ vā gatiṃ vā cutiṃ vā upapattiṃ vā vuddhiṃ vā virūḷhiṃ vā vepullaṃ vā paññāpessāmī’ti, netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Apart from form, feeling, perception, and choices, I will describe the coming and going of consciousness, its passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase, and maturity.’ That is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātuyā ce, bhikkhu, bhikkhuno rāgo pahīno hoti. Rāgassa pahānā vocchijjatārammaṇaṃ patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant has given up greed for the form element, the support is cut off, and there is no foundation for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanādhātuyā ce, bhikkhu, bhikkhuno … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant has given up greed for the feeling element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññādhātuyā ce, bhikkhu, bhikkhuno … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāradhātuyā ce, bhikkhu, bhikkhuno … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇadhātuyā ce, bhikkhu, bhikkhuno rāgo pahīno hoti. Rāgassa pahānā vocchijjatārammaṇaṃ patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness element, the support is cut off, and there is no foundation for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadappatiṭṭhitaṃ viññāṇaṃ avirūḷhaṃ anabhisaṅkhacca vimuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since that consciousness does not become established and does not grow, with no power to regenerate, it is freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttattā ṭhitaṃ. Ṭhitattā santusitaṃ. Santusitattā na paritassati. Aparitassaṃ paccattaññeva parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being free, it’s stable. Being stable, it’s content. Being content, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti … pe … nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended … there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, jānato evaṃ passato anantarā āsavānaṃ khayo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ending of the defilements is for one who knows and sees this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
