<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.115-115. Dhammakathikasutta  - 115. A Dhamma speaker </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.115. 115. Dhammakathikasutta  - 115. A Dhamma speaker </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Dhammakathikavagga  - 12. A Dhamma speaker </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘dhammakathiko, dhammakathiko’ti, bhante, vuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of a ‘Dhamma speaker’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, dhammakathiko hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a Dhamma speaker defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpassa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya dhammaṃ deseti ‘dhammakathiko bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, if a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who speaks on Dhamma’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpassa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti, ‘dhammānudhammappaṭipanno bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who practices in line with the teaching’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpassa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidā virāgā nirodhā anupādāvimutto hoti, ‘diṭṭhadhammanibbānappatto bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they’re freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya ce, bhikkhu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment with feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya ce, bhikkhu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārānañce, bhikkhu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇassa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya dhammaṃ deseti, ‘dhammakathiko bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, for its fading away and cessation, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who speaks on Dhamma’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇassa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti, ‘dhammānudhammappaṭipanno bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who practices in line with the teaching’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇassa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidā virāgā nirodhā anupādāvimutto hoti, ‘diṭṭhadhammanibbānappatto bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they’re freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
