<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.053-53. Upayasutta  - 53. Involvement </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.053. 53. Upayasutta  - 53. Involvement </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Upayavagga  - 6. Involvement </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Upayo, bhikkhave, avimutto, anupayo vimutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if you’re involved, you’re not free. If you’re not involved, you’re free. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpupayaṃ vā, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ tiṭṭhamānaṃ tiṭṭheyya, rūpārammaṇaṃ rūpappatiṭṭhaṃ nandūpasecanaṃ vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with form, supported by form, founded on form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanupayaṃ vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or consciousness would remain involved with feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññupayaṃ vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or consciousness would remain involved with perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārupayaṃ vā, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ tiṭṭhamānaṃ tiṭṭheyya, saṅkhārārammaṇaṃ saṅkhārappatiṭṭhaṃ nandūpasecanaṃ vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or as long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with choices, supported by choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, bhikkhave, evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, suppose you say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahamaññatra rūpā aññatra vedanāya aññatra saññāya aññatra saṅkhārehi viññāṇassa āgatiṃ vā gatiṃ vā cutiṃ vā upapattiṃ vā vuddhiṃ vā virūḷhiṃ vā vepullaṃ vā paññāpessāmī’ti, netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Apart from form, feeling, perception, and choices, I will describe the coming and going of consciousness, its passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase, and maturity.’ That is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātuyā ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno rāgo pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant has given up greed for the form element, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgassa pahānā vocchijjatārammaṇaṃ patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the support is cut off, and there is no foundation for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanādhātuyā ce, bhikkhave … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant has given up greed for the feeling element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññādhātuyā ce, bhikkhave … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāradhātuyā ce, bhikkhave … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇadhātuyā ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno rāgo pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness element, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgassa pahānā vocchijjatārammaṇaṃ patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the support is cut off, and there is no foundation for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadappatiṭṭhitaṃ viññāṇaṃ avirūḷhaṃ anabhisaṅkhacca vimuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since that consciousness does not become established and does not grow, with no power to regenerate, it is freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttattā ṭhitaṃ. Ṭhitattā santusitaṃ. Santusitattā na paritassati. Aparitassaṃ paccattaññeva parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being free, it’s stable. Being stable, it’s content. Being content, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
