<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.024-24. Abhijānasutta  - 24. Directly Knowing </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.024. 24. Abhijānasutta  - 24. Directly Knowing </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Bhāravagga  - 3. The Burden </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpaṃ, bhikkhave, anabhijānaṃ aparijānaṃ avirājayaṃ appajahaṃ abhabbo dukkhakkhayāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding form, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ anabhijānaṃ aparijānaṃ avirājayaṃ appajahaṃ abhabbo dukkhakkhayāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without directly knowing and completely understanding feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ anabhijānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre anabhijānaṃ aparijānaṃ avirājayaṃ appajahaṃ abhabbo dukkhakkhayāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ anabhijānaṃ aparijānaṃ avirājayaṃ appajahaṃ abhabbo dukkhakkhayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpañca kho, bhikkhave, abhijānaṃ parijānaṃ virājayaṃ pajahaṃ bhabbo dukkhakkhayāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">By directly knowing and completely understanding form, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ abhijānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">By directly knowing and completely understanding feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ abhijānaṃ parijānaṃ virājayaṃ pajahaṃ bhabbo dukkhakkhayāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
