<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.098-98. Suddhikasutta  - 98. Plain Version </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.098. 98. Suddhikasutta  - 98. Plain Version </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Pupphavagga  - 10. Flowers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthi nu kho, bhante, kiñci rūpaṃ, yaṃ rūpaṃ niccaṃ dhuvaṃ sassataṃ avipariṇāmadhammaṃ sassatisamaṃ tatheva ṭhassati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, is there any form at all that’s permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi nu kho, bhante, kāci vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is there any feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāci saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">keci saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kiñci viññāṇaṃ, yaṃ viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ dhuvaṃ sassataṃ avipariṇāmadhammaṃ sassatisamaṃ tatheva ṭhassatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness at all that’s permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthi kho, bhikkhu, kiñci rūpaṃ yaṃ rūpaṃ niccaṃ dhuvaṃ sassataṃ avipariṇāmadhammaṃ sassatisamaṃ tatheva ṭhassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, there is no form at all that’s permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi kho, bhikkhu, kāci vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s no feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāci saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">keci saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kiñci viññāṇaṃ, yaṃ viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ dhuvaṃ sassataṃ avipariṇāmadhammaṃ sassatisamaṃ tatheva ṭhassatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness at all that’s permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
