<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.133-133. Koṭṭhikasutta  - 133. With Koṭṭhita </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.133. 133. Koṭṭhikasutta  - 133. With Koṭṭhita </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Avijjāvagga  - 13. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bārāṇasiyaṃ viharanti isipatane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Benares. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto sāyanhasamayaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ mahākoṭṭhikaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta said to Mahākoṭṭhita: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘avijjā, avijjā’ti, āvuso koṭṭhika, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called ‘ignorance’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, āvuso, avijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is ignorance? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā ca avijjāgato hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is an ignorant person defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso, assutavā puthujjano rūpassa assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, an uneducated ordinary person doesn’t truly understand the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇassa assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccatāvuso, avijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā ca avijjāgato hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how an ignorant person is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ mahākoṭṭhikaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘vijjā, vijjā’ti, āvuso koṭṭhika, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called ‘knowledge’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, āvuso, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a knowledgeable person defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpassa assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, an educated noble disciple truly understands the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇassa assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccatāvuso, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how a knowledgeable person is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
