<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.135-135. Tatiyakoṭṭhikasutta  - 135. With Koṭṭhita (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.135. 135. Tatiyakoṭṭhikasutta  - 135. With Koṭṭhita (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Avijjāvagga  - 13. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taññeva nidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The same setting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ mahākoṭṭhikaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta said to Mahākoṭṭhita: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘avijjā, avijjā’ti, āvuso koṭṭhika, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called ‘ignorance’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, āvuso, avijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is ignorance? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā ca avijjāgato hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is an ignorant person defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso, assutavā puthujjano rūpaṃ nappajānāti, rūpasamudayaṃ nappajānāti, rūpanirodhaṃ nappajānāti, rūpanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, it’s when an uneducated ordinary person doesn’t understand form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanaṃ nappajānāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ nappajānāti, viññāṇasamudayaṃ nappajānāti, viññāṇanirodhaṃ nappajānāti, viññāṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccatāvuso, avijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā ca avijjāgato hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how an ignorant person is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ mahākoṭṭhikaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘vijjā, vijjā’ti, āvuso koṭṭhika, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called ‘knowledge’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, āvuso, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a knowledgeable person defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpaṃ pajānāti, rūpasamudayaṃ pajānāti, rūpanirodhaṃ pajānāti, rūpanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, it’s when an educated noble disciple understands form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ pajānāti, viññāṇasamudayaṃ pajānāti, viññāṇanirodhaṃ pajānāti, viññāṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccatāvuso, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how a knowledgeable person is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāvaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudayadhamme tīṇi, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assādo apare duve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samudaye ca dve vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">koṭṭhike apare tayoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
