<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.027-27. Dutiyaassādasutta  - 27. Gratification (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.027. 27. Dutiyaassādasutta  - 27. Gratification (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Bhāravagga  - 3. The Burden </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, assādapariyesanaṃ acariṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I went in search of form’s gratification, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo rūpassa assādo tadajjhagamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I found it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā rūpassa assādo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form’s gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ādīnavapariyesanaṃ acariṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went in search of form’s drawback, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo rūpassa ādīnavo tadajjhagamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I found it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā rūpassa ādīnavo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form’s drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, nissaraṇapariyesanaṃ acariṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went in search of form’s escape, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ rūpassa nissaraṇaṃ tadajjhagamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I found it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā rūpassa nissaraṇaṃ paññāya me taṃ sudiṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form’s escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāyāhaṃ, bhikkhave … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went in search of the gratification of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāyāhaṃ, bhikkhave … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārānāhaṃ, bhikkhave … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, assādapariyesanaṃ acariṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo viññāṇassa assādo tadajjhagamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I found it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā viññāṇassa assādo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of consciousness’s gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ādīnavapariyesanaṃ acariṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went in search of consciousness’s drawback, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo viññāṇassa ādīnavo tadajjhagamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I found it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā viññāṇassa ādīnavo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of consciousness’s drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, nissaraṇapariyesanaṃ acariṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went in search of consciousness’s escape, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ viññāṇassa nissaraṇaṃ tadajjhagamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I found it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā viññāṇassa nissaraṇaṃ paññāya me taṃ sudiṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of consciousness’s escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañcāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imesaṃ pañcannaṃ upādānakkhandhānaṃ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ nābbhaññāsiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I didn’t truly understand these five grasping aggregates’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abbhaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when I did truly understand these five grasping aggregates’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñāṇañca pana me dassanaṃ udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge and vision arose in me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘akuppā me vimutti; ayamantimā jāti; natthi dāni punabbhavo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there are no more future lives.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
