<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.060-60. Mahālisutta  - 60. With Mahāli </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.060. 60. Mahālisutta  - 60. With Mahāli </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Upayavagga  - 6. Involvement </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahāli licchavi yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho mahāli licchavi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahāli the Licchavi went up to the Buddha … and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pūraṇo, bhante, kassapo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa says this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi hetu natthi paccayo sattānaṃ saṅkilesāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is no cause or condition for the corruption of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahetū appaccayā sattā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are corrupted without cause or reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi hetu natthi paccayo sattānaṃ visuddhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s no cause or condition for the purification of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahetū appaccayā sattā visujjhantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha bhagavā kimāhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does the Buddha say about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, mahāli, hetu atthi paccayo sattānaṃ saṅkilesāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mahāli, there is a cause and condition for the corruption of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sahetū sappaccayā sattā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, mahāli, hetu, atthi paccayo sattānaṃ visuddhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a cause and condition for the purification of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sahetū sappaccayā sattā visujjhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are purified with cause and reason.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo pana, bhante, hetu katamo paccayo sattānaṃ saṅkilesāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what is the cause and condition for the corruption of sentient beings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃ sahetū sappaccayā sattā saṅkilissantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How are sentient beings corrupted with cause and reason?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpañca hidaṃ, mahāli, ekantadukkhaṃ abhavissa dukkhānupatitaṃ dukkhāvakkantaṃ anavakkantaṃ sukhena, nayidaṃ sattā rūpasmiṃ sārajjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mahāli, if form were exclusively painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—sentient beings wouldn’t lust after it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, mahāli, rūpaṃ sukhaṃ sukhānupatitaṃ sukhāvakkantaṃ anavakkantaṃ dukkhena, tasmā sattā rūpasmiṃ sārajjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because form is pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—sentient beings do lust after it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārāgā saṃyujjanti; saṃyogā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since they lust after it, they’re caught up in it, and so they become corrupted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, mahāli, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo sattānaṃ saṅkilesāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a cause and condition for the corruption of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ sahetū sappaccayā sattā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā ca hidaṃ, mahāli, ekantadukkhā abhavissa dukkhānupatitā dukkhāvakkantā anavakkantā sukhena, nayidaṃ sattā vedanāya sārajjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, mahāli, vedanā sukhā sukhānupatitā sukhāvakkantā anavakkantā dukkhena, tasmā sattā vedanāya sārajjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārāgā saṃyujjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃyogā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, mahāli, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo sattānaṃ saṅkilesāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi sahetū sappaccayā sattā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññā ca hidaṃ, mahāli … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā ca hidaṃ, mahāli, ekantadukkhā abhavissaṃsu dukkhānupatitā dukkhāvakkantā anavakkantā sukhena, nayidaṃ sattā saṅkhāresu sārajjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, mahāli, saṅkhārā sukhā sukhānupatitā sukhāvakkantā anavakkantā dukkhena, tasmā sattā saṅkhāresu sārajjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārāgā saṃyujjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃyogā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, mahāli, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo sattānaṃ saṅkilesāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi sahetū sappaccayā sattā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇañca hidaṃ, mahāli, ekantadukkhaṃ abhavissa dukkhānupatitaṃ dukkhāvakkantaṃ anavakkantaṃ sukhena, nayidaṃ sattā viññāṇasmiṃ sārajjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness were exclusively painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—sentient beings wouldn’t lust after it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, mahāli, viññāṇaṃ sukhaṃ sukhānupatitaṃ sukhāvakkantaṃ anavakkantaṃ dukkhena, tasmā sattā viññāṇasmiṃ sārajjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because consciousness is pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—sentient beings do lust after it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārāgā saṃyujjanti; saṃyogā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since they lust after it, they’re caught up in it, and so they become corrupted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, mahāli, hetu ayaṃ paccayo sattānaṃ saṅkilesāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a cause and condition for the corruption of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi sahetū sappaccayā sattā saṅkilissantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo pana, bhante, hetu katamo paccayo sattānaṃ visuddhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what is the cause and condition for the purification of sentient beings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃ sahetū sappaccayā sattā visujjhantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How are sentient beings purified with cause and reason?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpañca hidaṃ, mahāli, ekantasukhaṃ abhavissa sukhānupatitaṃ sukhāvakkantaṃ anavakkantaṃ dukkhena, nayidaṃ sattā rūpasmiṃ nibbindeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mahāli, if form were exclusively pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—sentient beings wouldn’t grow disillusioned with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, mahāli, rūpaṃ dukkhaṃ dukkhānupatitaṃ dukkhāvakkantaṃ anavakkantaṃ sukhena, tasmā sattā rūpasmiṃ nibbindanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because form is painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbindaṃ virajjanti; virāgā visujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they are purified. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, mahāli, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo, sattānaṃ visuddhiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a cause and condition for the purification of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ sahetū sappaccayā sattā visujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how sentient beings are purified with cause and reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā ca hidaṃ, mahāli, ekantasukhā abhavissa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā ca hidaṃ, mahāli … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā ca hidaṃ, mahāli, ekantasukhā abhavissaṃsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇañca hidaṃ, mahāli, ekantasukhaṃ abhavissa sukhānupatitaṃ sukhāvakkantaṃ anavakkantaṃ dukkhena, nayidaṃ sattā viññāṇasmiṃ nibbindeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness were exclusively pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—sentient beings wouldn’t grow disillusioned with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, mahāli, viññāṇaṃ dukkhaṃ dukkhānupatitaṃ dukkhāvakkantaṃ anavakkantaṃ sukhena, tasmā sattā viññāṇasmiṃ nibbindanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because consciousness is painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbindaṃ virajjanti; virāgā visujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they are purified. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, mahāli, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo, sattānaṃ visuddhiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a cause and condition for the purification of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi sahetū sappaccayā sattā visujjhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how sentient beings are purified with cause and reason.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
