<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.037-37. Ānandasutta  - 37. With Ānanda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.037. 37. Ānandasutta  - 37. With Ānanda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Natumhākavagga  - 4. It’s Not Yours </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Venerable Ānanda … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">sitting to one side, the Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace taṃ, ānanda, evaṃ puccheyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, suppose they were to ask you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘katamesaṃ, āvuso ānanda, dhammānaṃ uppādo paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyatī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverend Ānanda, what are the things for which arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ puṭṭho tvaṃ, ānanda, kinti byākareyyāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How would you answer?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace maṃ, bhante, evaṃ puccheyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, suppose they were to ask me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘katamesaṃ, āvuso ānanda, dhammānaṃ uppādo paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyatī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What are the things for which arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ puṭṭhohaṃ, bhante, evaṃ byākareyyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’d answer like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘rūpassa kho, āvuso, uppādo paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverend, the arising of form is evident, its vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The arising of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇassa uppādo paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness is evident, its vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, āvuso, dhammānaṃ uppādo paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the things for which arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ puṭṭhohaṃ, bhante, evaṃ byākareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how I’d answer such a question.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, ānanda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Ānanda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpassa kho, ānanda, uppādo paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The arising of form is evident, its vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The arising of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇassa uppādo paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness is evident, its vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, ānanda, dhammānaṃ uppādo paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṃ paññāyatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the things for which arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ puṭṭho tvaṃ, ānanda, evaṃ byākareyyāsī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should answer such a question.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
