<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.022-22. Bhārasutta  - 22. The Burden </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.022. 22. Bhārasutta  - 22. The Burden </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Bhāravagga  - 3. The Burden </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ … tatra kho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhārañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi bhārahārañca bhārādānañca bhāranikkhepanañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the burden, the bearer of the burden, the picking up of the burden, and the putting down of the burden. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, bhāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the burden? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcupādānakkhandhā tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The five grasping aggregates, it should be said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the burden. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, bhārahāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the bearer of the burden? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalo tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person, it should be said; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ āyasmā evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the venerable of such and such name and clan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhārahāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the bearer of the burden. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, bhārādānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the picking up of the burden? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ taṇhā ponobhavikā nandīrāgasahagatā tatratatrābhinandinī, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure in various different realms. That is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhārādānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the picking up of the burden. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, bhāranikkhepanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the putting down of the burden? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodho cāgo paṭinissaggo mutti anālayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not adhering to it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhāranikkhepanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the putting down of the burden.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhārā have pañcakkhandhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The five aggregates are indeed burdens, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhārahāro ca puggalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the person is the bearer of the burden. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhārādānaṃ dukhaṃ loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Picking up the burden is suffering in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhāranikkhepanaṃ sukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and putting the burden down is happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikkhipitvā garuṃ bhāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the heavy burden is put down </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṃ bhāraṃ anādiya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">without picking up another, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samūlaṃ taṇhamabbuyha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and craving’s pulled out from the root, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nicchāto parinibbuto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re hungerless, extinguished.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
