<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>22.088-88. Assajisutta  - 88. With Assaji </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">22.088. 88. Assajisutta  - 88. With Assaji </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Theravagga  - 9. Senior Mendicants </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā assaji kassapakārāme viharati ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Assaji was staying in a monastery built by a Kassapa, and he was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā assaji upaṭṭhāke āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he addressed his carers: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etha tumhe, āvuso, yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamatha; upasaṅkamitvā mama vacanena bhagavato pāde sirasā vandatha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, reverends, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘assaji, bhante, bhikkhu ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, the mendicant Assaji is sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhagavato pāde sirasā vandatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He bows with his head to your feet.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca vadetha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhu kira, bhante, bhagavā yena assaji bhikkhu tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, please go to the mendicant Assaji out of compassion.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato assajissa paṭissutvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” those monks replied. They did as he asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assaji, bhante, bhikkhu ābādhiko … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sādhu kira, bhante, bhagavā yena assaji bhikkhu tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā assaji tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to Venerable Assaji. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā assaji bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Assaji saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and tried to rise on his cot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ assajiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṃ, assaji, mā tvaṃ mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s all right, Assaji, don’t get up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santimāni āsanāni paññattāni, tatthāhaṃ nisīdissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some seats spread out by others, I will sit there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdi bhagavā paññatte āsane. Nisajja kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ assajiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He sat on the seat spread out and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci te, assaji, khamanīyaṃ, kacci yāpanīyaṃ … pe … paṭikkamosānaṃ paññāyati no abhikkamo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Assaji, I hope you’re keeping well; I hope you’re alright. And I hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ … pe … abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati no paṭikkamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’m not all right, I’m not getting by. My pain is terrible and growing, not fading, its growing is evident, not its fading.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci te, assaji, na kiñci kukkuccaṃ na koci vippaṭisāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you don’t have any remorse or regret?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha me, bhante, anappakaṃ kukkuccaṃ anappako vippaṭisāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, sir, I have no little remorse and regret.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci pana taṃ, assaji, attā sīlato na upavadatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you have no reason to blame yourself when it comes to ethical conduct?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho maṃ, bhante, attā sīlato upavadatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No sir, I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No ce kira taṃ, assaji, attā sīlato upavadati, atha kiñca te kukkuccaṃ ko ca vippaṭisāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, Assaji, why do you have remorse and regret?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbe khvāhaṃ, bhante, gelaññe passambhetvā passambhetvā kāyasaṅkhāre viharāmi, sohaṃ samādhiṃ nappaṭilabhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, before my time of illness I meditated having completely stilled the physical process. But now I can’t get immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, taṃ samādhiṃ appaṭilabhato evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since I can’t get immersion, I think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘no cassāhaṃ parihāyāmī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I not decline!’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, assaji, samaṇabrāhmaṇā samādhisārakā samādhisāmaññā tesaṃ taṃ samādhiṃ appaṭilabhataṃ evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Assaji, there are ascetics and brahmins for whom samādhi is the essence, equating immersion with the ascetic life. They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘no cassu mayaṃ parihāyāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May we not decline!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, assaji, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Assaji? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante” … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tasmātiha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So you should truly see … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ passaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, sā ‘aniccā’ti pajānāti. ‘Anajjhositā’ti pajānāti. ‘Anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t relish it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, sā ‘aniccā’ti pajānāti. ‘Anajjhositā’ti pajānāti. ‘Anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a painful feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t relish it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adukkhamasukhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, sā ‘aniccā’ti pajānāti … pe … ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a neutral feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t relish it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, visaṃyutto naṃ vedayati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, visaṃyutto naṃ vedayati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a painful feeling, they feel it detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adukkhamasukhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, visaṃyutto naṃ vedayati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyapariyantikañce vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. Jīvitapariyantikañce vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body approaching.’ Feeling the end of life approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life approaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kāyassa bhedā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything that’s felt, being no longer relished, will become cool right here.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, assaji, telañca paṭicca, vaṭṭiñca paṭicca, telappadīpo jhāyeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasseva telassa ca vaṭṭiyā ca pariyādānā anāhāro nibbāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the oil and the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to lack of fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, assaji, bhikkhu kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. Jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body approaching.’ Feeling the end of life approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life approaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kāyassa bhedā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything that’s felt, being no longer relished, will become cool right here.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
