<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>23.34-34. Nirodhadhammasutta  - 34. Liable To Cease </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">23.34. 34. Nirodhadhammasutta  - 34. Liable To Cease </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Āyācanavagga  - 3. Appeals </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā rādho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Rādha said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṃ desetu, yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, rādha, nirodhadhammo; tatra te chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rādha, you should give up any desire, any greed, any desire and greed for whatever is liable to cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, rādha, nirodhadhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is liable to cease? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpaṃ kho, rādha, nirodhadhammo; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form is liable to cease. You should give up any desire, any greed, any desire and greed for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā nirodhadhammo; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā nirodhadhammo; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā nirodhadhammo; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ nirodhadhammo; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is liable to cease. You should give up any desire, any greed, any desire and greed for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo kho, rādha, nirodhadhammo; tatra te chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should give up any desire, any greed, any desire and greed for whatever is liable to cease.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyācanavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māro ca māradhammo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccena apare duve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhena ca duve vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anattena tatheva ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khayavayasamudayaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirodhadhammena dvādasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
