<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>23.01-1. Mārasutta  - 1. About Māra </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">23.01. 1. Mārasutta  - 1. About Māra </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamamāravagga  - 1. About Māra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā rādho yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā rādho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Rādha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Māro, māro’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘Māra’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, māro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is Māra defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpe kho, rādha, sati māro vā assa māretā vā yo vā pana mīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When there is form, Rādha, there may be Māra, or the murderer, or the murdered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha tvaṃ, rādha, rūpaṃ māroti passa, māretāti passa, mīyatīti passa, rogoti passa, gaṇḍoti passa, sallanti passa, aghanti passa, aghabhūtanti passa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should see form as Māra, the murderer, the murdered, the diseased, the abscess, the dart, the misery, the miserable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye naṃ evaṃ passanti te sammā passanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who see it like this see rightly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe sati māro vā assa māretā vā yo vā pana mīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness, there may be Māra, or the murderer, or the murdered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha tvaṃ, rādha, viññāṇaṃ māroti passa, māretāti passa, mīyatīti passa, rogoti passa, gaṇḍoti passa, sallanti passa, aghanti passa, aghabhūtanti passa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should see consciousness as Māra, the murderer, the murdered, the diseased, the abscess, the dart, the misery, the miserable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye naṃ evaṃ passanti, te sammā passantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who see it like this see rightly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sammādassanaṃ pana, bhante, kimatthiyan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what’s the purpose of seeing rightly?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sammādassanaṃ kho, rādha, nibbidatthaṃ”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Disillusionment is the purpose of seeing rightly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nibbidā pana, bhante, kimatthiyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose of disillusionment?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nibbidā kho, rādha, virāgatthā”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Dispassion is the purpose of disillusionment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Virāgo pana, bhante, kimatthiyo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose of dispassion?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Virāgo kho, rādha, vimuttattho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Freedom is the purpose of dispassion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vimutti pana, bhante, kimatthiyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose of freedom?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vimutti kho, rādha, nibbānatthā”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Extinguishment is the purpose of freedom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nibbānaṃ pana, bhante, kimatthiyan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what is the purpose of extinguishment?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Accayāsi, rādha, pañhaṃ, nāsakkhi pañhassa pariyantaṃ gahetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your question goes too far, Rādha. You couldn’t figure out the limit of questions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbānogadhañhi, rādha, brahmacariyaṃ vussati, nibbānaparāyanaṃ nibbānapariyosānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For extinguishment is the culmination, destination, and end of the spiritual life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
