<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>23.07-7. Sotāpannasutta  - 7. A Stream-Enterer </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">23.07. 7. Sotāpannasutta  - 7. A Stream-Enterer </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamamāravagga  - 1. About Māra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ rādhaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When Venerable Rādha was seated to one side, the Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pañcime, rādha, upādānakkhandhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rādha, there are these five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpupādānakkhandho … pe … viññāṇupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, rādha, ariyasāvako imesaṃ pañcannaṃ upādānakkhandhānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple truly understands these five grasping aggregates’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, rādha, ariyasāvako sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called a noble disciple who is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
