<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>23.03-3. Bhavanettisutta  - 3. Attachment To Rebirth </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">23.03. 3. Bhavanettisutta  - 3. Attachment To Rebirth </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamamāravagga  - 1. About Māra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā rādho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, Venerable Rādha said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘bhavanettinirodho, bhavanettinirodho’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘the cessation of attachment to rebirth’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, bhante, bhavanetti, katamo bhavanettinirodho”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the attachment to rebirth? And what is the cessation of attachment to rebirth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpe kho, rādha, yo chando yo rāgo yā nandī yā taṇhā ye upayupādānā cetaso adhiṭṭhānābhinivesānusayā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rādha, any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for form; and any attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendencies—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati bhavanetti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called the attachment to rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ nirodho bhavanettinirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their cessation is the cessation of attachment to rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe yo chando … pe … adhiṭṭhānābhinivesānusayā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness; and any becoming involved, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendencies—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati bhavanetti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called the attachment to rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ nirodho bhavanettinirodho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their cessation is the cessation of attachment to rebirth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
