<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>24.08-8. Mahādiṭṭhisutta  - 8. The Extensive View </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">24.08. 8. Mahādiṭṭhisutta  - 8. The Extensive View </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sotāpattivagga  - 1. Stream-Entry </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kismiṃ nu kho, bhikkhave, sati, kiṃ upādāya, kiṃ abhinivissa evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on what, does the view arise: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sattime kāyā akaṭā, akaṭavidhā, animmitā, animmātā, vañjhā, kūṭaṭṭhā, esikaṭṭhāyiṭṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are these seven substances that are not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te na iñjanti, na vipariṇamanti, na aññamaññaṃ byābādhenti; nālaṃ aññamaññassa sukhāya vā dukkhāya vā sukhadukkhāya vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t move or deteriorate or obstruct each other. They’re unable to cause pleasure, pain, or neutral feeling to each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathavīkāyo, āpokāyo, tejokāyo, vāyokāyo, sukhe, dukkhe, jīve sattame. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The substances of earth, water, fire, air; pleasure, pain, and the soul is the seventh. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime satta kāyā akaṭā, akaṭavidhā, animmitā, animmātā, vañjhā, kūṭaṭṭhā esikaṭṭhāyiṭṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven substances are not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te na iñjanti, na vipariṇamanti, na aññamaññaṃ byābādhenti; nālaṃ aññamaññassa sukhāya vā dukkhāya vā sukhadukkhāya vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t move or deteriorate or obstruct each other. They’re unable to cause pleasure, pain, or neutral feeling to each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi tiṇhena satthena sīsaṃ chindati, na sopi kañci jīvitā voropeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you chop off someone’s head with a sharp sword, you don’t take anyone’s life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattannaṃ tveva kāyānamantarena satthaṃ vivaramanupavisati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sword simply passes through the gap between the seven substances. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cuddasa kho panimāni yonipamukhasatasahassāni saṭṭhi ca satāni cha ca satāni pañca ca kammuno satāni pañca ca kammāni, tīṇi ca kammāni, kamme ca aḍḍhakamme ca dvaṭṭhipaṭipadā, dvaṭṭhantarakappā, chaḷābhijātiyo, aṭṭha purisabhūmiyo, ekūnapaññāsa ājīvakasate, ekūnapaññāsa paribbājakasate, ekūnapaññāsa nāgavāsasate, vīse indriyasate, tiṃse nirayasate, chattiṃsarajodhātuyo, satta saññīgabbhā, satta asaññīgabbhā, satta nigaṇṭhigabbhā, satta devā, satta mānusā, satta pesācā, satta sarā, satta pavuṭā, satta papātā, satta ca papātasatāni, satta supinā, satta supinasatāni, cullāsīti mahākappino satasahassāni, yāni bāle ca paṇḍite ca sandhāvitvā saṃsaritvā dukkhassantaṃ karissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are 1.4 million main wombs, and 6,000, and 600. There are 500 deeds, and five, and three. There are deeds and half-deeds. There are 62 paths, 62 sub-eons, six classes of rebirth, and eight stages in a person’s life. There are 4,900 <i>Ājīvaka</i> ascetics, 4,900 wanderers, and 4,900 naked ascetics. There are 2,000 faculties, 3,000 hells, and 36 realms of dust. There are seven percipient embryos, seven non-percipient embryos, and seven embryos without attachments. There are seven gods, seven humans, and seven goblins. There are seven lakes, seven winds, seven cliffs, and 700 cliffs. There are seven dreams and 700 dreams. There are 8.4 million great eons through which the foolish and the astute transmigrate before making an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha natthi imināhaṃ sīlena vā vatena vā tapena vā brahmacariyena vā aparipakkaṃ vā kammaṃ paripācessāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And here there is no such thing as this: “By this precept or observance or mortification or spiritual life I shall force unripened deeds to bear their fruit, or eliminate old deeds by experiencing their results little by little”—for that cannot be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paripakkaṃ vā kammaṃ phussa phussa byantīkarissāmīti hevaṃ natthi doṇamite sukhadukkhe pariyantakate saṃsāre, natthi hāyanavaḍḍhane, natthi ukkaṃsāvakaṃse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasure and pain are allotted. Transmigration lasts only for a limited period, so there’s no increase or decrease, no getting better or worse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma suttaguḷe khitte nibbeṭhiyamānameva paleti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like how, when you toss a ball of string, it rolls away unraveling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva bāle ca paṇḍite ca nibbeṭhiyamānā sukhadukkhaṃ palentī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, after transmigrating the foolish and the astute will make an end of suffering’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpe kho, bhikkhave, sati, rūpaṃ upādāya, rūpaṃ abhinivissa evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the view arises: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sattime kāyā akaṭā, akaṭavidhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are these seven substances that are not made … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhadukkhaṃ palentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the foolish and the astute will make an end of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāya sati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu sati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe sati, viññāṇaṃ upādāya, viññāṇaṃ abhinivissa evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sattime kāyā akaṭā, akaṭavidhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are these seven substances that are not made … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhadukkhaṃ palentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the foolish and the astute will make an end of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante” … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, api nu taṃ anupādāya evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sattime kāyā akaṭā akaṭavidhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhadukkhaṃ palentī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā tampi niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That which is seen, heard, thought, known, sought, and explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api nu taṃ anupādāya evaṃ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would such a view arise?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sattime kāyā akaṭā akaṭavidhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbeṭhiyamānā sukhadukkhaṃ palentī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa imesu ca ṭhānesu kaṅkhā pahīnā hoti, dukkhepissa kaṅkhā pahīnā hoti … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāyapissa kaṅkhā pahīnā hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called a noble disciple who is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
