<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>26.10-10. Khandhasutta  - 10. The Aggregates </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">26.10. 10. Khandhasutta  - 10. The Aggregates </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Uppādavagga  - 1. Arising </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, bhikkhave, rūpassa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṃ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of form is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo saṅkhārānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo viññāṇassa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṃ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, rūpassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṃ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation, settling, and ending of form is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo vedanāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation, settling, and ending of feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo saññāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo saṅkhārānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo viññāṇassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṃ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppādavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu rūpañca viññāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phasso ca vedanāya ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññā ca cetanā taṇhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhātu khandhena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppādasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on arising are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
