<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>27.10-10. Khandhasutta  - 10. The Aggregates </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">27.10. 10. Khandhasutta  - 10. The Aggregates </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Kilesavagga  - 1. Corruptions </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo, bhikkhave, rūpasmiṃ chandarāgo, cittasseso upakkileso … pe … yo viññāṇasmiṃ chandarāgo, cittasseso upakkileso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, desire and greed for form, feeling, perception, choices, or consciousness is a corruption of the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno imesu pañcasu ṭhānesu cetaso upakkileso pahīno hoti, nekkhammaninnañcassa cittaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has given up mental corruption in these five cases, their mind inclines to renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhammaparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ kammaniyaṃ khāyati, abhiññā sacchikaraṇīyesu dhammesū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mind imbued with renunciation is declared to be capable of directly knowing anything that can be realized.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kilesavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu rūpañca viññāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phasso ca vedanāya ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññā ca cetanā taṇhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhātu khandhena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kilesasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on corruptions are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
