<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>28.09-9. Nirodhasamāpattisutta  - 9. The Attainment of Cessation </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">28.09. 9. Nirodhasamāpattisutta  - 9. The Attainment of Cessation </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sāriputtavagga  - 1. With Sāriputta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Ānanda saw Venerable Sāriputta … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāhaṃ, āvuso, sabbaso nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, I entered and remained in the cessation of perception and feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it didn’t occur to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpanno’ti vā ‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhā vuṭṭhito’ti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am entering the cessation of perception and feeling’ or ‘I have entered the cessation of perception and feeling’ or ‘I am emerging from the cessation of perception and feeling’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā hi panāyasmato sāriputtassa dīgharattaṃ ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā susamūhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated ego, possessiveness, and the underlying tendency to conceit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āyasmato sāriputtassa na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it didn’t occur to you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpanno’ti vā ‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhā vuṭṭhito’ti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am entering the cessation of perception and feeling’ or ‘I have entered the cessation of perception and feeling’ or ‘I am emerging from the cessation of perception and feeling’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
