<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>28.01-1. Vivekajasutta  - 1. Born of Seclusion </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">28.01. 1. Vivekajasutta  - 1. Born of Seclusion </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sāriputtavagga  - 1. With Sāriputta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā sāriputto sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto yena andhavanaṃ tenupasaṅkami divāvihārāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on his return from alms-round, he went to the Dark Forest, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhavanaṃ ajjhogāhetvā aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle divāvihāraṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">plunged deep into it, and sat at the root of a tree for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena jetavanaṃ anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāmo tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of retreat and went to Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Ānanda saw him coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vippasannāni kho te, āvuso sāriputta, indriyāni; parisuddho mukhavaṇṇo pariyodāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamenāyasmā sāriputto ajja vihārena vihāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What meditation were you practicing today?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāhaṃ, āvuso, vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it didn’t occur to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpanno’ti vā ‘ahaṃ paṭhamā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am entering the first absorption’ or ‘I have entered the first absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the first absorption’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā hi panāyasmato sāriputtassa dīgharattaṃ ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā susamūhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated ego, possessiveness, and the underlying tendency to conceit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āyasmato sāriputtassa na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it didn’t occur to you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘ahaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpanno’ti vā ‘ahaṃ paṭhamā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am entering the first absorption’ or ‘I have entered the first absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the first absorption’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
