<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>29.03-3. Uposathasutta  - 3. Sabbath </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">29.03. 3. Uposathasutta  - 3. Sabbath </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nāgavagga  - 1. Dragons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena m’idhekacce aṇḍajā nāgā uposathaṃ upavasanti vossaṭṭhakāyā ca bhavantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why some egg-born dragons keep the sabbath, having transformed their bodies?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, ekaccānaṃ aṇḍajānaṃ nāgānaṃ evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, it’s when some egg-born dragons think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mayaṃ kho pubbe kāyena dvayakārino ahumha, vācāya dvayakārino, manasā dvayakārino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In the past we did both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te mayaṃ kāyena dvayakārino, vācāya dvayakārino, manasā dvayakārino, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṃ nāgānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the body broke up, after death, we were reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacajja mayaṃ kāyena sucaritaṃ careyyāma, vācāya sucaritaṃ careyyāma, manasā sucaritaṃ careyyāma, evaṃ mayaṃ kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjeyyāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If today we do good things by body, speech, and mind, when the body breaks up, after death, we may be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handa mayaṃ etarahi kāyena sucaritaṃ carāma, vācāya sucaritaṃ carāma, manasā sucaritaṃ carāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Come, let us do good things by way of body, speech, and mind.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo, yena m’idhekacce aṇḍajā nāgā uposathaṃ upavasanti vossaṭṭhakāyā ca bhavantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why some egg-born dragons keep the sabbath, having transformed their bodies.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
