<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>30.03-3. Dvayakārīsutta  - 3. Both Kinds of Deeds </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">30.03. 3. Dvayakārīsutta  - 3. Both Kinds of Deeds </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Supaṇṇavagga  - 1. Phoenixes </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṃ supaṇṇānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena dvayakārī hoti, vācāya dvayakārī, manasā dvayakārī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, it’s when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sutaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they’ve heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aṇḍajā supaṇṇā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The egg-born phoenixes are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāhaṃ kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṃ supaṇṇānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjeyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṃ supaṇṇānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṃ supaṇṇānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
