<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>30.02-2. Harantisutta  - 2. They Carry Off </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">30.02. 2. Harantisutta  - 2. They Carry Off </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Supaṇṇavagga  - 1. Phoenixes </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catasso imā, bhikkhave, supaṇṇayoniyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, phoenixes reproduce in these four ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā catasso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṇḍajā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Phoenixes are born from eggs, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, bhikkhave, catasso supaṇṇayoniyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ways that phoenixes reproduce. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, aṇḍajā supaṇṇā aṇḍajeva nāge haranti, na jalābuje, na saṃsedaje, na opapātike. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of these, phoenixes born from an egg can only carry off dragons born from an egg, not those born from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, jalābujā supaṇṇā aṇḍaje ca jalābuje ca nāge haranti, na saṃsedaje, na opapātike. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Phoenixes born from a womb can carry off dragons born from an egg or from a womb, but not those born from moisture or spontaneously. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, saṃsedajā supaṇṇā aṇḍaje ca jalābuje ca saṃsedaje ca nāge haranti, na opapātike. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Phoenixes born from moisture can carry off dragons born from an egg, from a womb, or from moisture, but not those born spontaneously. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, opapātikā supaṇṇā aṇḍaje ca jalābuje ca saṃsedaje ca opapātike ca nāge haranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Phoenixes born spontaneously can carry off dragons born from an egg, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, catasso supaṇṇayoniyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ways that phoenixes reproduce.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
