<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>31.03-3. Mūlagandhadātāsutta  - 3. A Giver of Fragrant Roots </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">31.03. 3. Mūlagandhadātāsutta  - 3. A Giver of Fragrant Roots </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Gandhabbavagga  - 1. Fairies </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena sucaritaṃ carati, vācāya sucaritaṃ carati, manasā sucaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, it’s when someone does good things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sutaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they’ve heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mūlagandhe adhivatthā devā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāhaṃ kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjeyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dātā hoti mūlagandhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give gifts of fragrant roots. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhu, hetu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
