<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.141-145-141–145. Kūṭādisutta  - 141–145. A Roof Peak </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.141-145. 141–145. Kūṭādisutta  - 141–145. A Roof Peak </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Appamādapeyyālavagga  - 11. Abbreviated Texts on Diligence </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kūṭāgārassa yā kāci gopānasiyo sabbā tā kūṭaṅgamā kūṭaninnā kūṭasamosaraṇā; kūṭaṃ tāsaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(yathā heṭṭhimasuttantaṃ, evaṃ vitthāretabbaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(This should be told in full as in the previous discourse.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci mūlagandhā, kāḷānusāriyaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci sāragandhā, lohitacandanaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the best. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci pupphagandhā, vassikaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci kuṭṭarājāno, sabbe te rañño cakkavattissa anuyantā bhavanti, rājā tesaṃ cakkavatti aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
