<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.151-151. Nāgasutta  - 151. Dragons </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.151. 151. Nāgasutta  - 151. Dragons </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Balakaraṇīyavagga  - 12. Hard Work </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, himavantaṃ pabbatarājaṃ nissāya nāgā kāyaṃ vaḍḍhenti, balaṃ gāhenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, dragons grow and wax strong supported by the Himalayas, the king of mountains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te tattha kāyaṃ vaḍḍhetvā balaṃ gāhetvā kusobbhe otaranti, kusobbhe otaritvā mahāsobbhe otaranti, mahāsobbhe otaritvā kunnadiyo otaranti, kunnadiyo otaritvā mahānadiyo otaranti, mahānadiyo otaritvā mahāsamuddaṃ otaranti, te tattha mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ āpajjanti kāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’re strong they dive into the pools. Then they dive into the lakes, the streams, the rivers, and finally the ocean. There they acquire a great and abundant body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti dhammesu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti dhammesū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
