<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.159-159. Āgantukasutta  - 159. A Guest House </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.159. 159. Āgantukasutta  - 159. A Guest House </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Balakaraṇīyavagga  - 12. Hard Work </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, āgantukāgāraṃ. Tattha puratthimāyapi disāya āgantvā vāsaṃ kappenti, pacchimāyapi disāya āgantvā vāsaṃ kappenti, uttarāyapi disāya āgantvā vāsaṃ kappenti, dakkhiṇāyapi disāya āgantvā vāsaṃ kappenti, khattiyāpi āgantvā vāsaṃ kappenti, brāhmaṇāpi āgantvā vāsaṃ kappenti, vessāpi āgantvā vāsaṃ kappenti, suddāpi āgantvā vāsaṃ kappenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose there was a guest house. Lodgers come from the east, west, north, and south. Aristocrats, brahmins, merchants, and workers all stay there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto ye dhammā abhiññā pariññeyyā, te dhamme abhiññā parijānāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path completely understands by direct knowledge the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye dhammā abhiññā pahātabbā, te dhamme abhiññā pajahati, ye dhammā abhiññā sacchikātabbā, te dhamme abhiññā sacchikaroti, ye dhammā abhiññā bhāvetabbā, te dhamme abhiññā bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up by direct knowledge the things that should be given up by direct knowledge. They realize by direct knowledge the things that should be realized by direct knowledge. They develop by direct knowledge the things that should be developed by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pariññeyyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcupādānakkhandhātissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It should be said: the five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—rūpupādānakkhandho … pe … viññāṇupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pariññeyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pahātabbā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjā ca bhavataṇhā ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance and craving for continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā pahātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā sacchikātabbā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjā ca vimutti ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge and freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā sacchikātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā bhāvetabbā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samatho ca vipassanā ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Serenity and discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime, bhikkhave, dhammā abhiññā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto, ye dhammā abhiññā pariññeyyā te dhamme abhiññā parijānāti … pe … ye dhammā abhiññā bhāvetabbā, te dhamme abhiññā bhāveti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path in this way? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti … pe … sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto ye dhammā abhiññā pariññeyyā, te dhamme abhiññā parijānāti, ye dhammā abhiññā pahātabbā, te dhamme abhiññā pajahati, ye dhammā abhiññā sacchikātabbā, te dhamme abhiññā sacchikaroti, ye dhammā abhiññā bhāvetabbā, te dhamme abhiññā bhāvetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant develops and cultivates the eightfold path in this way.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
