<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.153-153. Kumbhasutta  - 153. Pots </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.153. 153. Kumbhasutta  - 153. Pots </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Balakaraṇīyavagga  - 12. Hard Work </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kumbho nikkujjo vamateva udakaṃ, no paccāvamati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose a pot full of water is tipped over, so the water drains out and doesn’t go back in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto vamateva pāpake akusale dhamme, no paccāvamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path expels bad, unskillful qualities and doesn’t let them back in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto vamateva pāpake akusale dhamme, no paccāvamati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path expel bad, unskillful qualities and not let them back in? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto vamateva pāpake akusale dhamme, no paccāvamatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path expels bad, unskillful qualities and doesn’t let them back in.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
