<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.020-20. Tatiyakukkuṭārāmasutta  - 20. At the Chicken Monastery (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.020. 20. Tatiyakukkuṭārāmasutta  - 20. At the Chicken Monastery (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Vihāravagga  - 2. Meditation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṭaliputtanidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Pāṭaliputta. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Brahmacariyaṃ, brahmacariyan’ti, āvuso ānanda, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, they speak of this thing called the ‘spiritual path’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho, āvuso, brahmacariyaṃ, katamo brahmacārī, katamaṃ brahmacariyapariyosānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the spiritual path? Who is someone on the spiritual path? And what is the culmination of the spiritual path?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, āvuso bhadda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaddako kho te, āvuso bhadda, ummaṅgo, bhaddakaṃ paṭibhānaṃ, kalyāṇī paripucchā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your approach and articulation are excellent, and it’s a good question. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi tvaṃ, āvuso bhadda, pucchasi: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘brahmacariyaṃ, brahmacariyanti, āvuso ānanda, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho, āvuso, brahmacariyaṃ, katamo brahmacārī, katamaṃ brahmacariyapariyosānan’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayameva kho, āvuso, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo brahmacariyaṃ, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The spiritual path is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, āvuso, iminā ariyena aṭṭhaṅgikena maggena samannāgato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who possesses this noble eightfold path </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati brahmacārī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called someone on the spiritual path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, āvuso, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ending of greed, hate, and delusion: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ brahmacariyapariyosānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the culmination of the spiritual path.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīṇi suttantāni ekanidānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihāravaggo dutiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve vihārā ca sekkho ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppādā apare duve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhena dve vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuṭārāmena tayoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
