<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.003-3. Sāriputtasutta  - 3. Sāriputta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.003. 3. Sāriputtasutta  - 3. Sāriputta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Avijjāvagga  - 1. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sakalamidaṃ, bhante, brahmacariyaṃ, yadidaṃ—kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, good friends, companions, and associates are the whole of the spiritual life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Sāriputta! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakalamidaṃ, sāriputta, brahmacariyaṃ, yadidaṃ—kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good friends, companions, and associates are the whole of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalyāṇamittassetaṃ, sāriputta, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṃ kalyāṇasahāyassa kalyāṇasampavaṅkassa—ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvessati, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkarissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, sāriputta, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto kalyāṇasahāyo kalyāṇasampavaṅko ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, sāriputta, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, sāriputta, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto kalyāṇasahāyo kalyāṇasampavaṅko ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadamināpetaṃ, sāriputta, pariyāyena veditabbaṃ yathā sakalamidaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, yadidaṃ—kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And here’s another way to understand how good friends are the whole of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mamañhi, sāriputta, kalyāṇamittaṃ āgamma jātidhammā sattā jātiyā parimuccanti; jarādhammā sattā jarāya parimuccanti; maraṇadhammā sattā maraṇena parimuccanti; sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsadhammā sattā sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsehi parimuccanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For, by relying on me as a good friend, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā kho etaṃ, sāriputta, pariyāyena veditabbaṃ yathā sakalamidaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, yadidaṃ—kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is another way to understand how good friends are the whole of the spiritual life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
