<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.170-170. Taṇhāsutta  - 170. Craving </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.170. 170. Taṇhāsutta  - 170. Craving </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Esanāvagga  - 13. Searches </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, taṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three cravings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso taṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three cravings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṃ taṇhānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya … pe … ayaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three cravings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the noble eightfold path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṃ taṇhānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya … pe … ayaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three cravings.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasināsutta </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thirst </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, tasinā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three thirsts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmatasinā, bhavatasinā, vibhavatasinā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thirst for sensual pleasures, thirst to continue existence, and thirst to end existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṃ tasinānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three thirsts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāgavinayapariyosānaṃ dosavinayapariyosānaṃ mohavinayapariyosānaṃ…pe… </span></p>
<p class="p3">… which culminates in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amatogadhaṃ amataparāyanaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ…pe… </span></p>
<p class="p3">… which culminates, finishes, and ends in the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbānaninnaṃ nibbānapoṇaṃ nibbānapabbhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">… which slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṃ tasinānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya …pe…  ayaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three thirsts.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esanāvaggo sattamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esanā vidhā āsavo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavo ca dukkhatā khilā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Malaṃ nīgho ca vedanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve taṇhā tasināya cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
