<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.158-158. Nāvāsutta  - 158. A Ship </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.158. 158. Nāvāsutta  - 158. A Ship </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Balakaraṇīyavagga  - 12. Hard Work </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, sāmuddikāya nāvāya vettabandhanabandhāya cha māsāni udake pariyādāya hemantikena thalaṃ ukkhittāya vātātapaparetāni bandhanāni tāni pāvussakena meghena abhippavuṭṭhāni appakasireneva paṭippassambhanti, pūtikāni bhavanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose there was a sea-faring ship bound together with ropes. For six months they deteriorated in the water. Then in the cold season it was hauled up on dry land, where the ropes were weathered by wind and sun. When the clouds soaked it with rain, the ropes would readily collapse and rot away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvayato ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroto appakasireneva saṃyojanāni paṭippassambhanti, pūtikāni bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when a mendicant develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path their fetters readily collapse and rot away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvayato ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroto appakasireneva saṃyojanāni paṭippassambhanti, pūtikāni bhavanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how do they develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path so that their fetters readily collapse and rot away? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti … pe … sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvayato ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroto appakasireneva saṃyojanāni paṭippassambhanti, pūtikāni bhavantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how they develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path so that their fetters readily collapse and rot away.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
