<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.008-8. Vibhaṅgasutta  - 8. Analysis </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.008. 8. Vibhaṅgasutta  - 8. Analysis </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Avijjāvagga  - 1. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ariyaṃ vo, bhikkhave, aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ desessāmi vibhajissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach and analyze for you the noble eightfold path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhikkhave, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what is the noble eightfold path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right view? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dukkhe ñāṇaṃ, dukkhasamudaye ñāṇaṃ, dukkhanirodhe ñāṇaṃ, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right thought? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, bhikkhave, nekkhammasaṅkappo, abyāpādasaṅkappo, avihiṃsāsaṅkappo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is the thought of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called right thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammāvācā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right speech? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, musāvādā veramaṇī, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī, samphappalāpā veramaṇī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāvācā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called right speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammākammanto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right action? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, pāṇātipātā veramaṇī, adinnādānā veramaṇī, abrahmacariyā veramaṇī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual activity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammākammanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called right action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāājīvo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right livelihood? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako micchāājīvaṃ pahāya sammāājīvena jīvitaṃ kappeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple gives up wrong livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāājīvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called right livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāvāyāmo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right effort? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ anuppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya chandaṃ janeti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ janeti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have not arisen do arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāvāyāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called right effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammāsati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right mindfulness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu vedanānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte cittānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāsamādhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right immersion? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca viharati sato ca sampajāno, sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṃvedeti, yaṃ taṃ ariyā ācikkhanti: ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāsamādhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called right immersion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
