<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.002-2. Upaḍḍhasutta  - 2. Half the Spiritual Life </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.002. 2. Upaḍḍhasutta  - 2. Half the Spiritual Life </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Avijjāvagga  - 1. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakyesu viharati nagarakaṃ nāma sakyānaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, where they have a town named Nagaraka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“upaḍḍhamidaṃ, bhante, brahmacariyaṃ, yadidaṃ—kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, good friends, companions, and associates are half the spiritual life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, ānanda, mā hevaṃ, ānanda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Not so, Ānanda! Not so, Ānanda! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakalamevidaṃ, ānanda, brahmacariyaṃ, yadidaṃ—kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good friends, companions, and associates are the whole of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalyāṇamittassetaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṃ kalyāṇasahāyassa kalyāṇasampavaṅkassa—ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvessati, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkarissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto kalyāṇasahāyo kalyāṇasampavaṅko ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops right view, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsaṅkappaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop right thought … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammantaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right action … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right livelihood … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsatiṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right mindfulness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right immersion, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto kalyāṇasahāyo kalyāṇasampavaṅko ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadamināpetaṃ, ānanda, pariyāyena veditabbaṃ yathā sakalamevidaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, yadidaṃ—kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And here’s another way to understand how good friends are the whole of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mamañhi, ānanda, kalyāṇamittaṃ āgamma jātidhammā sattā jātiyā parimuccanti; jarādhammā sattā jarāya parimuccanti; maraṇadhammā sattā maraṇena parimuccanti; sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsadhammā sattā sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsehi parimuccanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For, by relying on me as a good friend, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā kho etaṃ, ānanda, pariyāyena veditabbaṃ yathā sakalamevidaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, yadidaṃ—kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is another way to understand how good friends are the whole of the spiritual life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
