<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.011-11. Paṭhamavihārasutta  - 11. Meditation (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.011. 11. Paṭhamavihārasutta  - 11. Meditation (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Vihāravagga  - 2. Meditation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Icchāmahaṃ, bhikkhave, aḍḍhamāsaṃ paṭisallīyituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for a fortnight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Namhi kenaci upasaṅkamitabbo, aññatra ekena piṇḍapātanīhārakenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No-one should approach me, except for the one who brings my alms-food.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paṭissutvā nāssudha koci bhagavantaṃ upasaṅkamati, aññatra ekena piṇḍapātanīhārakena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except for the one who brought the alms-food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassa aḍḍhamāsassa accayena paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then after a fortnight had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yena svāhaṃ, bhikkhave, vihārena paṭhamābhisambuddho viharāmi, tassa padesena vihāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I’ve been practicing part of the meditation I practiced when I was first awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I understand that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘micchādiṭṭhipaccayāpi vedayitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">there’s feeling conditioned by wrong view </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhipaccayāpi vedayitaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">and feeling conditioned by right view. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāsamādhipaccayāpi vedayitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s feeling conditioned by wrong immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhipaccayāpi vedayitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and feeling conditioned by right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chandapaccayāpi vedayitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s feeling conditioned by desire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitakkapaccayāpi vedayitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāpaccayāpi vedayitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and by perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chando ca avūpasanto hoti, vitakko ca avūpasanto hoti, saññā ca avūpasantā hoti, tappaccayāpi vedayitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as desire, thought, and perception are not stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chando ca vūpasanto hoti, vitakko ca vūpasanto hoti, saññā ca vūpasantā hoti, tappaccayāpi vedayitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When desire, thought, and perception are stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appattassa pattiyā atthi āyāmaṃ, tasmimpi ṭhāne anuppatte tappaccayāpi vedayitan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is effort to attain the unattained. When that state has been attained, there is also feeling conditioned by that.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
