<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.029-29. Vedanāsutta  - 29. Feeling </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.029. 29. Vedanāsutta  - 29. Feeling </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Micchattavagga  - 3. The Wrong Way </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṃ vedanānaṃ pariññāya ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble eightfold path should be developed to completely understand these three feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the noble eightfold path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṃ vedanānaṃ pariññāya ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This noble eightfold path should be developed to completely understand these three feelings.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
