<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.042-47-42–47. Saṃyojanappahānādisuttachakka  - 42–47. Six Discourses on Giving Up Fetters, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.042-47. 42–47. Saṃyojanappahānādisuttachakka  - 42–47. Six Discourses on Giving Up Fetters, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Aññatitthiyapeyyālavagga  - 5. Abbreviated Texts on Followers of Other Paths </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace vo, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṃ puccheyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another path were to ask you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kimatthiyaṃ, āvuso, samaṇe gotame brahmacariyaṃ vussatī’ti, evaṃ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ evaṃ byākareyyātha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverends, what’s the purpose of living the spiritual life with the ascetic Gotama?’ You should answer them like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṃyojanappahānatthaṃ kho, āvuso, bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ vussatī’ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The purpose of living the spiritual life under the Buddha is to give up the fetters.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anusayasamugghātanatthaṃ kho, āvuso, bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ vussatī’ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘… to uproot the underlying tendencies.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘addhānapariññatthaṃ kho, āvuso, bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ vussatī’ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘… to completely understand the course of time.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘āsavānaṃ khayatthaṃ kho, āvuso, bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ vussatī’ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘… to end the defilements.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyatthaṃ kho, āvuso, bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ vussatī’ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘… to realize the fruit of knowledge and freedom.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ñāṇadassanatthaṃ kho, āvuso, bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ vussatī’ti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘… for knowledge and vision.’ …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
