<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.018-18. Paṭhamakukkuṭārāmasutta  - 18. At the Chicken Monastery (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.018. 18. Paṭhamakukkuṭārāmasutta  - 18. At the Chicken Monastery (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Vihāravagga  - 2. Meditation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca ānando āyasmā ca bhaddo pāṭaliputte viharanti kukkuṭārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the venerables Ānanda and Bhadda were staying at Pāṭaliputta, in the Chicken Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā bhaddo sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā ānandena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Bhadda came out of retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā bhaddo āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Abrahmacariyaṃ, abrahmacariyan’ti, āvuso ānanda, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, they speak of this thing called ‘not the spiritual path’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho, āvuso, abrahmacariyan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is not the spiritual path?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, āvuso bhadda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaddako kho te, āvuso bhadda, ummaṅgo, bhaddakaṃ paṭibhānaṃ, kalyāṇī paripucchā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your approach and articulation are excellent, and it’s a good question. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi tvaṃ, āvuso bhadda, pucchasi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For you asked: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘abrahmacariyaṃ, abrahmacariyanti, āvuso ānanda, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They speak of this thing called “not the spiritual path”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho, āvuso, abrahmacariyan’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is not the spiritual path?’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayameva kho, āvuso, aṭṭhaṅgiko micchāmaggo abrahmacariyaṃ, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is not the spiritual path is simply the wrong eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchādiṭṭhi … pe … micchāsamādhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
