<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.152-152. Rukkhasutta  - 152. Trees </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.152. 152. Rukkhasutta  - 152. Trees </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Balakaraṇīyavagga  - 12. Hard Work </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rukkho pācīnaninno pācīnapoṇo pācīnapabbhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose a tree slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So mūlacchinno katamena papateyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">If it was cut off at the root, where would it fall?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yena, bhante, ninno yena poṇo yena pabbhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, it would fall in the direction that it slants, slopes, and inclines.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvento ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
