<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.006-6. Kuṇḍaliyasutta  - 6. Kuṇḍaliya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.006. 6. Kuṇḍaliyasutta  - 6. Kuṇḍaliya </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Pabbatavagga  - 1. Mountains </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sākete viharati añjanavane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāketa in the deer part at the Añjana Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kuṇḍaliyo paribbājako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Kuṇḍaliya went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho kuṇḍaliyo paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahamasmi, bho gotama, ārāmanissayī parisāvacaro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, I like to hang around the monasteries and visit the assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bho gotama, pacchābhattaṃ bhuttapātarāsassa ayamācāro hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When I’ve finished breakfast, it’s my habit to </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāmena ārāmaṃ uyyānena uyyānaṃ anucaṅkamāmi anuvicarāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wander from monastery to monastery, from park to park. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha passāmi eke samaṇabrāhmaṇe itivādappamokkhānisaṃsañceva kathaṃ kathente upārambhānisaṃsañca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There I see some ascetics and brahmins speaking for the sake of winning debates and finding fault. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhavaṃ pana gotamo kimānisaṃso viharatī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">But what benefit does Master Gotama live for?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vijjāvimuttiphalānisaṃso kho, kuṇḍaliya, tathāgato viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The benefit the Realized One lives for, Kuṇḍaliya, is the fruit of knowledge and freedom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katame pana, bho gotama, dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill knowledge and freedom?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satta kho, kuṇḍaliya, bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The seven awakening factors.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katame pana, bho gotama, dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill the seven awakening factors?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattāro kho, kuṇḍaliya, satipaṭṭhānā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The four kinds of mindfulness meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katame pana, bho gotama, dhammā bhāvitā, bahulīkatā cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūrentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīṇi kho, kuṇḍaliya, sucaritāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūrentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The three kinds of good conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katame pana, bho gotama, dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā tīṇi sucaritāni paripūrentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill the three kinds of good conduct?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Indriyasaṃvaro kho, kuṇḍaliya, bhāvito bahulīkato tīṇi sucaritāni paripūretīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sense restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvito ca, kuṇḍaliya, indriyasaṃvaro kathaṃ bahulīkato tīṇi sucaritāni paripūretīti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Kuṇḍaliya, how is sense restraint developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the three kinds of good conduct? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, kuṇḍaliya, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā manāpaṃ nābhijjhati nābhihaṃsati, na rāgaṃ janeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant sees an agreeable sight with their eye. They don’t desire it or enjoy it, and they don’t give rise to greed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ṭhito ca kāyo hoti, ṭhitaṃ cittaṃ ajjhattaṃ susaṇṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhunā kho paneva rūpaṃ disvā amanāpaṃ na maṅku hoti appatiṭṭhitacitto adīnamānaso abyāpannacetaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if they see a disagreeable sight they’re not dismayed; their mind isn’t hardened, dejected, or full of ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ṭhito ca kāyo hoti ṭhitaṃ cittaṃ ajjhattaṃ susaṇṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, kuṇḍaliya, bhikkhu sotena saddaṃ sutvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant hears an agreeable sound with the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells an agreeable odor with the nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes an agreeable flavor with the tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feels an agreeable touch with the body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya manāpaṃ nābhijjhati nābhihaṃsati, na rāgaṃ janeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">knows an agreeable thought with their mind. They don’t desire it or enjoy it, and they don’t give rise to greed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ṭhito ca kāyo hoti, ṭhitaṃ cittaṃ ajjhattaṃ susaṇṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manasā kho paneva dhammaṃ viññāya amanāpaṃ na maṅku hoti appatiṭṭhitacitto adīnamānaso abyāpannacetaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if they know a disagreeable thought they’re not dismayed; their mind isn’t hardened, dejected, or full of ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ṭhito ca kāyo hoti, ṭhitaṃ cittaṃ ajjhattaṃ susaṇṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, kuṇḍaliya, bhikkhuno cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā manāpāmanāpesu rūpesu ṭhito ca kāyo hoti, ṭhitaṃ cittaṃ ajjhattaṃ susaṇṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant’s mind and body are steady internally, they’re well settled and well freed when it comes to both agreeable and disagreeable sights, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">sounds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya manāpāmanāpesu dhammesu ṭhito ca kāyo hoti, ṭhitaṃ cittaṃ ajjhattaṃ susaṇṭhitaṃ suvimuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvito kho, kuṇḍaliya, indriyasaṃvaro evaṃ bahulīkato tīṇi sucaritāni paripūreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how sense restraint is developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the three kinds of good conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitāni ca, kuṇḍaliya, tīṇi sucaritāni kathaṃ bahulīkatāni cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūrenti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are the three kinds of good conduct developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, kuṇḍaliya, bhikkhu kāyaduccaritaṃ pahāya kāyasucaritaṃ bhāveti, vacīduccaritaṃ pahāya vacīsucaritaṃ bhāveti, manoduccaritaṃ pahāya manosucaritaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant gives up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develops good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitāni kho, kuṇḍaliya, tīṇi sucaritāni evaṃ bahulīkatāni cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the three kinds of good conduct are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, kuṇḍaliya, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā kathaṃ bahulīkatā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrenti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, kuṇḍaliya, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, kuṇḍaliya, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā evaṃ bahulīkatā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, kuṇḍaliya, satta bojjhaṅgā kathaṃ bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrenti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to fulfill knowledge and freedom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, kuṇḍaliya, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, kuṇḍaliya, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṃ bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill knowledge and freedom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, kuṇḍaliyo paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the wanderer Kuṇḍaliya said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho gotama, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evameva bhotā gotamena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
