<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.041-41. Vidhāsutta  - 41. Discriminations </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.041. 41. Vidhāsutta  - 41. Discriminations </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Cakkavattivagga  - 5. A Wheel Turning Monarch </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā tisso vidhā pajahiṃsu, sabbe te sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past who have given up the three discriminations have done so by developing and cultivating the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā tisso vidhā pajahissanti, sabbe te sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the ascetics and brahmins in the future who will give up the three discriminations will do so by developing and cultivating the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā tisso vidhā pajahanti, sabbe te sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are giving up the three discriminations do so by developing and cultivating the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgassa … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā tisso vidhā pajahiṃsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the ascetics and brahmins in the past … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pajahissanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">future … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pajahanti, sabbe te imesaṃyeva sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and present who give up the three discriminations do so by developing and cultivating the seven awakening factors.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
