<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.013-13. Dutiyasūriyūpamasutta  - 13. The Simile of the Sun (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.013. 13. Dutiyasūriyūpamasutta  - 13. The Simile of the Sun (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Gilānavagga  - 2. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sūriyassa, bhikkhave, udayato etaṃ pubbaṅgamaṃ etaṃ pubbanimittaṃ, yadidaṃ—aruṇuggaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ uppādāya etaṃ pubbaṅgamaṃ etaṃ pubbanimittaṃ, yadidaṃ—yonisomanasikāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, for a mendicant proper attention is the forerunner and precursor of the arising of the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yonisomanasikārasampannassetaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—satta bojjhaṅge bhāvessati, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkarissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant accomplished in proper attention can expect to develop and cultivate the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yonisomanasikārasampanno satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaroti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant with proper attention develop and cultivate the seven awakening factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yonisomanasikārasampanno satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkarotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant with proper attention develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
