<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.016-16. Tatiyagilānasutta  - 16. Sick (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.016. 16. Tatiyagilānasutta  - 16. Sick (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Gilānavagga  - 2. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā ābādhiko hoti dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time he was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahācundo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ mahācundaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Mahācunda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭibhantu taṃ, cunda, bojjhaṅgā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Cunda, express your understanding of the awakening factors.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, bhante, bojjhaṅgā bhagavatā sammadakkhātā bhāvitā bahulīkatā abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the Buddha has rightly explained these seven awakening factors. When developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge, to awakening, and to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo kho, bhante, bhagavatā sammadakkhāto bhāvito bahulīkato abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo kho, bhante, bhagavatā sammadakkhāto bhāvito bahulīkato abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhante, satta bojjhaṅgā bhagavatā sammadakkhātā bhāvitā bahulīkatā abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven awakening factors that the Buddha has rightly explained. When developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge, to awakening, and to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha, cunda, bojjhaṅgā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, Cunda, these are awakening factors! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taggha, cunda, bojjhaṅgā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Indeed, Cunda, these are awakening factors!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavocāyasmā cundo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is what Cunda said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanuñño satthā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teacher approved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhahi ca bhagavā tamhā ābādhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s how the Buddha recovered from that illness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāpahīno ca bhagavato so ābādho ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
