<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.028-28. Nibbedhabhāgiyasutta  - 28. Helping Penetration </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.028. 28. Nibbedhabhāgiyasutta  - 28. Helping Penetration </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Udāyivagga  - 3. With Udāyī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nibbedhabhāgiyaṃ vo, bhikkhave, maggaṃ desessāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you a path that helps penetration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, nibbedhabhāgiyo maggo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the path that helps penetration? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satta bojjhaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā udāyī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Udāyī said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ bhāvitā nu kho, bhante, satta bojjhaṅgā kathaṃ bahulīkatā nibbedhāya saṃvattantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to lead to penetration?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, udāyi, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ vipulaṃ mahaggataṃ appamāṇaṃ abyāpajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Udāyī, it’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factor of mindfulness, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvitena cittena anibbiddhapubbaṃ appadālitapubbaṃ lobhakkhandhaṃ nibbijjhati padāleti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">With a mind that has developed the awakening factor of mindfulness, they penetrate and shatter the mass of greed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anibbiddhapubbaṃ appadālitapubbaṃ dosakkhandhaṃ nibbijjhati padāleti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mass of hate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anibbiddhapubbaṃ appadālitapubbaṃ mohakkhandhaṃ nibbijjhati padāleti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the mass of delusion for the first time. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ vipulaṃ mahaggataṃ appamāṇaṃ abyāpajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant develops the awakening factor of equanimity, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvitena cittena anibbiddhapubbaṃ appadālitapubbaṃ lobhakkhandhaṃ nibbijjhati padāleti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">With a mind that has developed the awakening factor of equanimity, they penetrate and shatter the mass of greed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anibbiddhapubbaṃ appadālitapubbaṃ dosakkhandhaṃ nibbijjhati padāleti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mass of hate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anibbiddhapubbaṃ appadālitapubbaṃ mohakkhandhaṃ nibbijjhati padāleti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the mass of delusion for the first time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, udāyi, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṃ bahulīkatā nibbedhāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how are the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to lead to penetration.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
