<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.004-4. Vatthasutta  - 4. Clothes </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.004. 4. Vatthasutta  - 4. Clothes </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Pabbatavagga  - 1. Mountains </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā sāriputto sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho āyasmā sāriputto bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āvuso bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āvuso”ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato sāriputtassa paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā sāriputto etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, āvuso, bojjhaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo, dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgo, vīriyasambojjhaṅgo, pītisambojjhaṅgo, passaddhisambojjhaṅgo, samādhisambojjhaṅgo, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, āvuso, satta bojjhaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ khvāhaṃ, āvuso, sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ yena yena bojjhaṅgena ākaṅkhāmi pubbaṇhasamayaṃ viharituṃ, tena tena bojjhaṅgena pubbaṇhasamayaṃ viharāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the morning, I meditate on whichever of these seven awakening factors I want. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena yena bojjhaṅgena ākaṅkhāmi majjhanhikaṃ samayaṃ viharituṃ, tena tena bojjhaṅgena majjhanhikaṃ samayaṃ viharāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">At midday, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena yena bojjhaṅgena ākaṅkhāmi sāyanhasamayaṃ viharituṃ, tena tena bojjhaṅgena sāyanhasamayaṃ viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and in the evening, I meditate on whichever of these seven awakening factors I want. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo iti ce me, āvuso, hoti, ‘appamāṇo’ti me hoti, ‘susamāraddho’ti me hoti, tiṭṭhantañca naṃ ‘tiṭṭhatī’ti pajānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If it’s the awakening factor of mindfulness, I know that it’s limitless and that it’s properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it remains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacepi me cavati, ‘idappaccayā me cavatī’ti pajānāmi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if it subsides I understand that it subsides. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo iti ce me, āvuso, hoti, ‘appamāṇo’ti me hoti, ‘susamāraddho’ti me hoti, tiṭṭhantañca naṃ ‘tiṭṭhatī’ti pajānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If it’s the awakening factor of equanimity, I know that it’s limitless and that it’s properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it remains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacepi me cavati, ‘idappaccayā me cavatī’ti pajānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if it subsides I understand that it subsides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, āvuso, rañño vā rājamahāmattassa vā nānārattānaṃ dussānaṃ dussakaraṇḍako pūro assa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose that a ruler or their minister had a chest full of garments of different colors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yaññadeva dussayugaṃ ākaṅkheyya pubbaṇhasamayaṃ pārupituṃ, taṃ tadeva dussayugaṃ pubbaṇhasamayaṃ pārupeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the morning, they’d don whatever pair of garments they wanted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaññadeva dussayugaṃ ākaṅkheyya majjhanhikaṃ samayaṃ pārupituṃ, taṃ tadeva dussayugaṃ majjhanhikaṃ samayaṃ pārupeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">At midday, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaññadeva dussayugaṃ ākaṅkheyya sāyanhasamayaṃ pārupituṃ, taṃ tadeva dussayugaṃ sāyanhasamayaṃ pārupeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and in the evening, they’d don whatever pair of garments they wanted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva khvāhaṃ, āvuso, imesaṃ sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ yena yena bojjhaṅgena ākaṅkhāmi pubbaṇhasamayaṃ viharituṃ, tena tena bojjhaṅgena pubbaṇhasamayaṃ viharāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, in the morning, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena yena bojjhaṅgena ākaṅkhāmi majjhanhikaṃ samayaṃ viharituṃ, tena tena bojjhaṅgena majjhanhikaṃ samayaṃ viharāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">at midday, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena yena bojjhaṅgena ākaṅkhāmi sāyanhasamayaṃ viharituṃ, tena tena bojjhaṅgena sāyanhasamayaṃ viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and in the evening, I meditate on whichever of these seven awakening factors I want. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo iti ce me, āvuso, hoti, ‘appamāṇo’ti me hoti, ‘susamāraddho’ti me hoti, tiṭṭhantañca naṃ ‘tiṭṭhatī’ti pajānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If it’s the awakening factor of mindfulness, I know that it’s limitless and that it’s properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it remains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacepi me cavati, ‘idappaccayā me cavatī’ti pajānāmi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if it subsides I understand that it subsides. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo iti ce me, āvuso, hoti, ‘appamāṇo’ti me hoti, ‘susamāraddho’ti me hoti, tiṭṭhantañca naṃ ‘tiṭṭhatī’ti pajānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If it’s the awakening factor of equanimity, I know that it’s limitless and that it’s properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it remains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacepi me cavati, ‘idappaccayā me cavatī’ti pajānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if it subsides I understand that it subsides.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
