<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.130-130. Uddhambhāgiyasutta  - 130. Higher Fetters </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.130. 130. Uddhambhāgiyasutta  - 130. Higher Fetters </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Oghavagga  - 13. Floods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, uddhambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūparāgo, arūparāgo, māno, uddhaccaṃ, avijjā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ uddhambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya satta bojjhaṅgā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The seven awakening factors should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti rāgavinayapariyosānaṃ dosavinayapariyosānaṃ mohavinayapariyosānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amatogadhaṃ amataparāyanaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… which culminate, finish, and end in the deathless …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbānaninnaṃ nibbānapoṇaṃ nibbānapabbhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… which culminate, finish, and end in extinguishment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcannaṃ uddhambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ime satta bojjhaṅgā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The seven awakening factors should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Oghavaggo terasamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ogho yogo upādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ganthā anusayena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaguṇā nīvaraṇā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khandhā oruddhambhāgiyānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
