<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.042-42. Cakkavattisutta  - 42. A Wheel Turning Monarch </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.042. 42. Cakkavattisutta  - 42. A Wheel Turning Monarch </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Cakkavattivagga  - 5. A Wheel Turning Monarch </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rañño, bhikkhave, cakkavattissa pātubhāvā sattannaṃ ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a Wheel Turning Monarch appears seven treasures appear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ sattannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkaratanassa pātubhāvo hoti, hatthiratanassa pātubhāvo hoti, assaratanassa pātubhāvo hoti, maṇiratanassa pātubhāvo hoti, itthiratanassa pātubhāvo hoti, gahapatiratanassa pātubhāvo hoti, pariṇāyakaratanassa pātubhāvo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and the counselor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rañño, bhikkhave, cakkavattissa pātubhāvā imesaṃ sattannaṃ ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a Wheel Turning Monarch appears these seven treasures appear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, pātubhāvā arahato sammāsambuddhassa sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgaratanānaṃ pātubhāvo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha appears the seven treasures of the awakening factors appear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ sattannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgassa ratanassa pātubhāvo hoti … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa ratanassa pātubhāvo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The treasures of the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, pātubhāvā arahato sammāsambuddhassa imesaṃ sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgaratanānaṃ pātubhāvo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha appears these seven treasures of the awakening factors appear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
