<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.018-18. Viraddhasutta  - 18. Missed Out </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.018. 18. Viraddhasutta  - 18. Missed Out </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Gilānavagga  - 2. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the seven awakening factors has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has undertaken the seven awakening factors has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime satta bojjhaṅgā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has missed out on these seven awakening factors has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime satta bojjhaṅgā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has undertaken these seven awakening factors has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
