<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.001-1. Himavantasutta  - 1. The Himalaya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.001. 1. Himavantasutta  - 1. The Himalaya </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Pabbatavagga  - 1. Mountains </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, himavantaṃ pabbatarājānaṃ nissāya nāgā kāyaṃ vaḍḍhenti, balaṃ gāhenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, dragons grow and wax strong supported by the Himalayas, the king of mountains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te tattha kāyaṃ vaḍḍhetvā balaṃ gāhetvā kusobbhe otaranti, kusobbhe otaritvā mahāsobbhe otaranti, mahāsobbhe otaritvā kunnadiyo otaranti, kunnadiyo otaritvā mahānadiyo otaranti, mahānadiyo otaritvā mahāsamuddasāgaraṃ otaranti; te tattha mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ āpajjanti kāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’re strong they dive into the pools. Then they dive into the lakes, the streams, the rivers, and finally the ocean. There they acquire a great and abundant body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti dhammesūti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant develop the seven awakening factors depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factor of mindfulness, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the awakening factor of investigation of principles … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the awakening factor of energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the awakening factor of rapture … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passaddhisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the awakening factor of tranquility … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the awakening factor of immersion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the awakening factor of equanimity, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto mahantattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti dhammesū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
