<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.033-33. Upakkilesasutta  - 33. Corruptions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.033. 33. Upakkilesasutta  - 33. Corruptions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Nīvaraṇavagga  - 4. Hindrances </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, jātarūpassa upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭhaṃ jātarūpaṃ na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ, na ca pabhassaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca, na ca sammā upeti kammāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five corruptions of gold. When gold is corrupted by these it’s not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and not completely ready for working. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayo, bhikkhave, jātarūpassa upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhaṃ jātarūpaṃ na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ, na ca pabhassaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca, na ca sammā upeti kammāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Iron, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lohaṃ, bhikkhave, jātarūpassa upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhaṃ jātarūpaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">copper, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tipu, bhikkhave, jātarūpassa upakkileso … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīsaṃ, bhikkhave, jātarūpassa upakkileso … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">lead, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sajjhu, bhikkhave, jātarūpassa upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhaṃ jātarūpaṃ na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ, na ca pabhassaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca, na ca sammā upeti kammāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and silver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca jātarūpassa upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭhaṃ jātarūpaṃ na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ, na ca pabhassaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca, na ca sammā upeti kammāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When gold is corrupted by these five corruptions it’s not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and not completely ready for working. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, pañcime cittassa upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭhaṃ cittaṃ na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ, na ca pabhassaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca, na ca sammā samādhiyati āsavānaṃ khayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are these five corruptions of the mind. When the mind is corrupted by these it’s not pliable, workable, or radiant. It’s brittle, and not completely immersed in samādhi for the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmacchando, bhikkhave, cittassa upakkileso, yena upakkilesena upakkiliṭṭhaṃ cittaṃ na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ, na ca pabhassaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca, na ca sammā samādhiyati āsavānaṃ khayāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca cittassa upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭhaṃ cittaṃ na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ, na ca pabhassaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca, na ca sammā samādhiyati āsavānaṃ khayāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five corruptions of the mind. When the mind is corrupted by these it’s not pliable, workable, or radiant. It’s brittle, and not completely immersed in samādhi for the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
