<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.22-22. Ciraṭṭhitisutta  - 22. Long Lasting </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.22. 22. Ciraṭṭhitisutta  - 22. Long Lasting </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sīlaṭṭhitivagga  - 3. Ethics and Duration </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃyeva nidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The same setting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā bhaddo āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, āvuso ānanda, hetu, ko paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo na ciraṭṭhitiko hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, Reverend Ānanda, what is the reason why the true teaching does not last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko panāvuso ānanda, hetu, ko paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo ciraṭṭhitiko hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the cause, what is the reason why the true teaching does last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, āvuso bhadda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaddako kho te, āvuso bhadda, ummaṅgo, bhaddakaṃ paṭibhānaṃ, kalyāṇī paripucchā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your approach and articulation are excellent, and it’s a good question. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi tvaṃ, āvuso bhadda, pucchasi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For you asked: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ko nu kho, āvuso ānanda, hetu, ko paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo na ciraṭṭhitiko hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What is the cause, Reverend Ānanda, what is the reason why the true teaching does not last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko panāvuso ānanda, hetu, ko paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo ciraṭṭhitiko hotī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the cause, what is the reason why the true teaching does last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One?’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catunnaṃ kho, āvuso, satipaṭṭhānānaṃ abhāvitattā abahulīkatattā tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo na ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s because of not developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn’t last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnañca kho, āvuso, satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching does last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, āvuso, catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ abhāvitattā abahulīkatattā tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo na ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of not developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn’t last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesañca kho, āvuso, catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo ciraṭṭhitiko hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching does last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
