<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.95-104-95–104. Uddhambhāgiyādisutta  - 95–104. Higher Fetters, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.95-104. 95–104. Uddhambhāgiyādisutta  - 95–104. Higher Fetters, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Oghavagga  - 10. Floods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, uddhambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in SN 45.171–179, with the following as the final discourse.) “Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūparāgo, arūparāgo, māno, uddhaccaṃ, avijjā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ uddhambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The four kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ uddhambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ime cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Yathā maggasaṃyuttaṃ tathā satipaṭṭhānasaṃyuttaṃ vitthāretabbaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(The Linked Discourses on Mindfulness Meditation should be expanded as in the Linked Discourses on the Path.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Oghavaggo dasamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ogho yogo upādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Floods, bonds, grasping, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ganthā anusayena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">ties, and underlying tendencies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaguṇā nīvaraṇā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khandhā oruddhambhāgiyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">aggregates, and fetters high and low. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satipaṭṭhānasaṃyuttaṃ tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on Mindfulness Meditation is the third section.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
