<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.05-5. Akusalarāsisutta  - 5. A Heap of the Unskillful </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.05. 5. Akusalarāsisutta  - 5. A Heap of the Unskillful </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ambapālivagga  - 1. In Ambapālī’s Wood </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘akusalarāsī’ti, bhikkhave, vadamāno pañca nīvaraṇe sammā vadamāno vadeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rightly speaking, mendicants, you’d call these five hindrances a ‘heap of the unskillful’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kevalo hāyaṃ, bhikkhave, akusalarāsi, yadidaṃ—pañca nīvaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the unskillful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmacchandanīvaraṇaṃ, byāpādanīvaraṇaṃ, thinamiddhanīvaraṇaṃ, uddhaccakukkuccanīvaraṇaṃ, vicikicchānīvaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The hindrances of sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Akusalarāsī’ti, bhikkhave, vadamāno ime pañca nīvaraṇe sammā vadamāno vadeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rightly speaking, you’d call these five hindrances a ‘heap of the unskillful’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kevalo hāyaṃ, bhikkhave, akusalarāsi, yadidaṃ—pañca nīvaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the unskillful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kusalarāsī’ti, bhikkhave, vadamāno cattāro satipaṭṭhāne sammā vadamāno vadeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rightly speaking, you’d call these four kinds of mindfulness meditation a ‘heap of the skillful’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kevalo hāyaṃ, bhikkhave, kusalarāsi, yadidaṃ—cattāro satipaṭṭhānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For these four kinds of mindfulness meditation are entirely a heap of the skillful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of the mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kusalarāsī’ti, bhikkhave, vadamāno ime cattāro satipaṭṭhāne sammā vadamāno vadeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rightly speaking, you’d call these four kinds of mindfulness meditation a ‘heap of the skillful’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kevalo hāyaṃ, bhikkhave, kusalarāsi, yadidaṃ—cattāro satipaṭṭhānā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For these four kinds of mindfulness meditation are entirely a heap of the skillful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
