<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.09-9. Gilānasutta  - 9. Sick </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.09. 9. Gilānasutta  - 9. Sick </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ambapālivagga  - 1. In Ambapālī’s Wood </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"> ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati veḷuvagāmake. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the little village of Beluva. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etha tumhe, bhikkhave, samantā vesāliyā yathāmittaṃ yathāsandiṭṭhaṃ yathāsambhattaṃ vassaṃ upetha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, please enter the rainy season residence with whatever friends or acquaintances you have around Vesālī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhevāhaṃ veḷuvagāmake vassaṃ upagacchāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll commence the rainy season residence right here in the little village of Beluva.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paṭissutvā samantā vesāliyā yathāmittaṃ yathāsandiṭṭhaṃ yathāsambhattaṃ vassaṃ upagacchuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” those mendicants replied. They did as the Buddha said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā pana tattheva veḷuvagāmake vassaṃ upagacchi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while the Buddha commenced the rainy season residence right there in the little village of Beluva. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato vassūpagatassa kharo ābādho uppajji, bāḷhā vedanā vattanti māraṇantikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After the Buddha had commenced the rainy season residence, he fell severely ill, struck by dreadful pains, close to death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra sudaṃ bhagavā sato sampajāno adhivāsesi avihaññamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But he endured with mindfulness and situational awareness, without worrying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kho me taṃ patirūpaṃ, yohaṃ anāmantetvā upaṭṭhāke anapaloketvā bhikkhusaṃghaṃ parinibbāyeyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It would not be appropriate for me to become fully extinguished before informing my attendants and taking leave of the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ imaṃ ābādhaṃ vīriyena paṭipaṇāmetvā jīvitasaṅkhāraṃ adhiṭṭhāya vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I forcefully suppress this illness, stabilize the life force, and live on?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā taṃ ābādhaṃ vīriyena paṭipaṇāmetvā jīvitasaṅkhāraṃ adhiṭṭhāya vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that is what he did. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato so ābādho paṭippassambhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha’s illness died down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā gilānā vuṭṭhito aciravuṭṭhito gelaññā vihārā nikkhamitvā vihārapacchāyāyaṃ paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon after the Buddha had recovered from that sickness, he left his dwelling and sat in the shade of the porch on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“diṭṭho me, bhante, bhagavato phāsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, it’s fantastic that the Buddha is comfortable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhaṃ, bhante, bhagavato khamanīyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that he’s well, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhaṃ, bhante, bhagavato yāpanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that he’s alright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca me, bhante, madhurakajāto viya kāyo, disāpi me na pakkhāyanti, dhammāpi maṃ nappaṭibhanti bhagavato gelaññena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because when the Buddha was sick, my body felt like it was drugged. I was disorientated, and the teachings didn’t spring to mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca me, bhante, ahosi kācideva assāsamattā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Still, at least I was consoled by the thought that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na tāva bhagavā parinibbāyissati, na yāva bhagavā bhikkhusaṃghaṃ ārabbha kiñcideva udāharatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddha won’t become fully extinguished without making some statement regarding the Saṅgha of mendicants.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana dāni, ānanda, bhikkhusaṃgho mayi paccāsīsati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what could the mendicant Saṅgha expect from me now, Ānanda? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Desito, ānanda, mayā dhammo anantaraṃ abāhiraṃ karitvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve taught the Dhamma without making any distinction between secret and public teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthānanda, tathāgatassa dhammesu ācariyamuṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One doesn’t have the closed fist of a teacher when it comes to the teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, ānanda, evamassa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If there’s anyone who thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ bhikkhusaṃghaṃ pariharissāmī’ti vā, ‘mamuddesiko bhikkhusaṃgho’ti vā, so nūna, ānanda, bhikkhusaṃghaṃ ārabbha kiñcideva udāhareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ll take charge of the Saṅgha of mendicants,’ or ‘the Saṅgha of mendicants is meant for me,’ let them make a statement regarding the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa kho, ānanda, na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Realized One doesn’t think like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ bhikkhusaṃghaṃ pariharissāmī’ti vā, ‘mamuddesiko bhikkhusaṃgho’ti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kiṃ, ānanda, tathāgato bhikkhusaṃghaṃ ārabbha kiñcideva udāharissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so why should he make some statement regarding the Saṅgha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi kho panāhaṃ, ānanda, jiṇṇo vuddho mahallako addhagato vayoanuppatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m now old, elderly and senior. I’m advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsītiko me vayo vattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m currently eighty years old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, jajjarasakaṭaṃ veḷamissakena yāpeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a decrepit cart keeps going by relying on straps, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, ānanda, veḷamissakena maññe tathāgatassa kāyo yāpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way, the Realized One’s body keeps going by relying on straps, or so you’d think. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, ānanda, samaye tathāgato sabbanimittānaṃ amanasikārā ekaccānaṃ vedanānaṃ nirodhā animittaṃ cetosamādhiṃ upasampajja viharati, phāsutaro, ānanda, tasmiṃ samaye tathāgatassa kāyo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sometimes the Realized One, not focusing on any signs, and with the cessation of certain feelings, enters and remains in the signless immersion of the heart. Only then does the Realized One’s body become more comfortable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihānanda, attadīpā viharatha attasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā, dhammadīpā dhammasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Ānanda, be your own island, your own refuge, with no other refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other refuge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, bhikkhu attadīpo viharati attasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo, dhammadīpo dhammasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, bhikkhu attadīpo viharati attasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo, dhammadīpo dhammasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge. That’s how the teaching is their island and their refuge, with no other refuge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, ānanda, etarahi vā mamaccaye vā attadīpā viharissanti attasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā, dhammadīpā dhammasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā; tamatagge mete, ānanda, bhikkhū bhavissanti ye keci sikkhākāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as their island and their refuge, with no other refuge—those mendicants of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the best.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
