<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.26-26. Padesasutta  - 26. Partly </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.26. 26. Padesasutta  - 26. Partly </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sīlaṭṭhitivagga  - 3. Ethics and Duration </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca sāriputto āyasmā ca mahāmoggallāno āyasmā ca anuruddho sākete viharanti kaṇḍakīvane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the venerables Sāriputta, Mahāmoggallāna, and Anuruddha were staying near Sāketa, in the Thorny Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ca sāriputto āyasmā ca mahāmoggallāno sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhitā yenāyasmā anuruddho tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā anuruddhena saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta and Mahāmoggallāna came out of retreat, went to Anuruddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. Sāriputta said to Anuruddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘sekho, sekho’ti, āvuso anuruddha, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, they speak of this person called ‘a trainee’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, āvuso, sekho hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a trainee defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catunnaṃ kho, āvuso, satipaṭṭhānānaṃ padesaṃ bhāvitattā sekho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, a trainee is someone who has partly developed the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, āvuso, catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ padesaṃ bhāvitattā sekho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A trainee is someone who has partly developed the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
