<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.06-6. Sakuṇagghisutta  - 6. A Hawk </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.06. 6. Sakuṇagghisutta  - 6. A Hawk </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ambapālivagga  - 1. In Ambapālī’s Wood </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, sakuṇagghi lāpaṃ sakuṇaṃ sahasā ajjhappattā aggahesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, a hawk suddenly swooped down and grabbed a quail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, lāpo sakuṇo sakuṇagghiyā hariyamāno evaṃ paridevasi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as the quail was being carried off he wailed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mayamevamha alakkhikā, mayaṃ appapuññā, ye mayaṃ agocare carimha paravisaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’m so unlucky, so unfortunate, to have roamed out of my territory into the domain of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacejja mayaṃ gocare careyyāma sake pettike visaye, na myāyaṃ, sakuṇagghi, alaṃ abhavissa, yadidaṃ—yuddhāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If today I’d roamed within my own territory, the domain of my fathers, this hawk wouldn’t have been able to beat me by fighting.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ko pana te, lāpa, gocaro sako pettiko visayo’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘So, quail, what is your own territory, the domain of your fathers?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yadidaṃ—naṅgalakaṭṭhakaraṇaṃ leḍḍuṭṭhānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s a ploughed field covered with clods of earth.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakuṇagghi sake bale apatthaddhā sake bale asaṃvadamānā lāpaṃ sakuṇaṃ pamuñci: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Confident in her own strength, the hawk was not daunted or intimidated. She released the quail, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gaccha kho tvaṃ, lāpa, tatrapi me gantvā na mokkhasī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Go now, quail. But even there you won’t escape me!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, lāpo sakuṇo naṅgalakaṭṭhakaraṇaṃ leḍḍuṭṭhānaṃ gantvā mahantaṃ leḍḍuṃ abhiruhitvā sakuṇagghiṃ vadamāno aṭṭhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the quail went to a ploughed field covered with clods of earth. He climbed up a big clod, and standing there, he said to the hawk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ehi kho dāni me, sakuṇagghi, ehi kho dāni me, sakuṇagghī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Come get me, hawk! Come get me, hawk!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā, bhikkhave, sakuṇagghi sake bale apatthaddhā sake bale asaṃvadamānā ubho pakkhe sannayha lāpaṃ sakuṇaṃ sahasā ajjhappattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Confident in her own strength, the hawk was not daunted or intimidated. She folded her wings and suddenly swooped down on the quail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā kho, bhikkhave, aññāsi lāpo sakuṇo ‘bahuāgato kho myāyaṃ sakuṇagghī’ti, atha tasseva leḍḍussa antaraṃ paccupādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the quail knew that the hawk was nearly there, he slipped under that clod. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakuṇagghi tattheva uraṃ paccatāḷesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the hawk crashed chest-first right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi taṃ, bhikkhave, hoti yo agocare carati paravisaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what happens when you roam out of your territory into the domain of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, mā agocare carittha paravisaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, mendicants, don’t roam out of your own territory into the domain of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agocare, bhikkhave, carataṃ paravisaye lacchati māro otāraṃ, lacchati māro ārammaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you roam out of your own territory into the domain of others, Māra will find a vulnerability and get hold of you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno agocaro paravisayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is not a mendicant’s own territory but the domain of others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadidaṃ—pañca kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sotaviññeyyā saddā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sounds known by the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānaviññeyyā gandhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smells known by the nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tastes known by the tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno agocaro paravisayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is not a mendicant’s own territory but the domain of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gocare, bhikkhave, caratha sake pettike visaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should roam inside your own territory, the domain of your fathers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gocare, bhikkhave, carataṃ sake pettike visaye na lacchati māro otāraṃ, na lacchati māro ārammaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you roam inside your own territory, the domain of your fathers, Māra won’t find a vulnerability or get hold of you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno gocaro sako pettiko visayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a mendicant’s own territory, the domain of the fathers? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro satipaṭṭhānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno gocaro sako pettiko visayo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a mendicant’s own territory, the domain of the fathers.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
