<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.33-33. Viraddhasutta  - 33. Missed Out </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.33. 33. Viraddhasutta  - 33. Missed Out </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Ananussutavagga  - 4. Not Learned From Anyone Else </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the four kinds of mindfulness meditation has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has undertaken the four kinds of mindfulness meditation has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime cattāro satipaṭṭhānā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has missed out on these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime cattāro satipaṭṭhānā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has undertaken these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
