<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.15-15. Bāhiyasutta  - 15. With Bāhiya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.15. 15. Bāhiyasutta  - 15. With Bāhiya </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nālandavagga  - 2. At Nālandā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā bāhiyo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā bāhiyo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Bāhiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṃ desetu, yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātiha tvaṃ, bāhiya, ādimeva visodhehi kusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Bāhiya, you should purify the starting point of skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cādi kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the starting point of skillful qualities? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlañca suvisuddhaṃ, diṭṭhi ca ujukā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well purified ethics and correct view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho te, bāhiya, sīlañca suvisuddhaṃ bhavissati, diṭṭhi ca ujukā, tato tvaṃ, bāhiya, sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāveyyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When your ethics are well purified and your view is correct, you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha tvaṃ, bāhiya, kāye kāyānupassī viharāhi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharāhi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho tvaṃ, bāhiya, sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya ime cattāro satipaṭṭhāne evaṃ bhāvessasi, tato tuyhaṃ, bāhiya, yā ratti vā divaso vā āgamissati, vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu, no parihānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you develop these four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on ethics, you can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā bāhiyo bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Venerable Bāhiya approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā bāhiyo eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto viharanto nacirasseva—yassatthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṃ—brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Bāhiya, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā”ti abbhaññāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is no return to any state of existence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro ca panāyasmā bāhiyo arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Bāhiya became one of the perfected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
