<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.14-14. Ukkacelasutta  - 14. At Ukkacelā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.14. 14. Ukkacelasutta  - 14. At Ukkacelā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nālandavagga  - 2. At Nālandā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vajjīsu viharati ukkacelāyaṃ gaṅgāya nadiyā tīre mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ aciraparinibbutesu sāriputtamoggallānesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjīs near Ukkacelā on the bank of the Ganges river, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. It was not long after Sāriputta and Moggallāna had become fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā bhikkhusaṅghaparivuto ajjhokāse nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time the Buddha was sitting in the open, surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tuṇhībhūtaṃ bhikkhusaṃghaṃ anuviloketvā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of monks, who were silent. He addressed them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“api myāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā suññā viya khāyati parinibbutesu sāriputtamoggallānesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this assembly seems empty to me now that Sāriputta and Moggallāna have become fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asuññā me, bhikkhave, parisā hoti, anapekkhā tassaṃ disāyaṃ hoti, yassaṃ disāyaṃ sāriputtamoggallānā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When Sāriputta and Moggallāna were alive, my assembly was never empty; I had no concern for any region where they stayed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi te, bhikkhave, ahesuṃ atītamaddhānaṃ arahanto sammāsambuddhā, tesampi bhagavantānaṃ etapparamaṃyeva sāvakayugaṃ ahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddhas of the past or the future have pairs of chief disciples who are no better than </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi mayhaṃ sāriputtamoggallānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta and Moggallāna were to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, bhikkhave, bhavissanti anāgatamaddhānaṃ arahanto sammāsambuddhā, tesampi bhagavantānaṃ etapparamaṃyeva sāvakayugaṃ bhavissati—seyyathāpi mayhaṃ sāriputtamoggallānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchariyaṃ, bhikkhave, sāvakānaṃ, abbhutaṃ, bhikkhave, sāvakānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s an incredible and amazing quality of such disciples </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthu ca nāma sāsanakarā bhavissanti ovādappaṭikarā, catunnañca parisānaṃ piyā bhavissanti manāpā garubhāvanīyā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that they fulfill the Teacher’s instructions and follow his advice. And they’re liked and approved, respected and admired by the four assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchariyaṃ, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa, abbhutaṃ, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And it’s an incredible and amazing quality of the Realized One </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpepi nāma sāvakayuge parinibbute natthi tathāgatassa soko vā paridevo vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that when such a pair of disciples becomes fully extinguished he does not sorrow or lament. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kutettha, bhikkhave, labbhā. Yaṃ taṃ jātaṃ bhūtaṃ saṅkhataṃ palokadhammaṃ, taṃ vata mā palujjīti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could it possibly be so that what is born, created, conditioned, and liable to fall apart should not fall apart? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahato rukkhassa tiṭṭhato sāravato ye mahantatarā khandhā te palujjeyyuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood, and the largest branch fell off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, mahato bhikkhusaṃghassa tiṭṭhato sāravato sāriputtamoggallānā parinibbutā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, in the great Saṅgha that stands with heartwood, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have become fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kutettha, bhikkhave, labbhā. Yaṃ taṃ jātaṃ bhūtaṃ saṅkhataṃ palokadhammaṃ, taṃ vata mā palujjīti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could it possibly be so that what is born, created, conditioned, and liable to fall apart should not fall apart? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, attadīpā viharatha attasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā, dhammadīpā dhammasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So mendicants, be your own island, your own refuge, with no other refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other refuge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu attadīpo viharati attasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo, dhammadīpo dhammasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu attadīpo viharati attasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo, dhammadīpo dhammasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge. That’s how the teaching is their island and their refuge, with no other refuge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi vā mamaccaye vā attadīpā viharissanti attasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā, dhammadīpā dhammasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā; tamatagge mete, bhikkhave, bhikkhū bhavissanti ye keci sikkhākāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as their island and their refuge, with no other refuge—those mendicants of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the best.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
