<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.039-39. Kaṭṭhopamasutta  - 39. The Simile of the Fire Sticks </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.039. 39. Kaṭṭhopamasutta  - 39. The Simile of the Fire Sticks </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sukhindriyavagga  - 4. The Pleasure Faculty </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhindriyaṃ, dukkhindriyaṃ, somanassindriyaṃ, domanassindriyaṃ, upekkhindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculty of pleasure arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhitova samāno ‘sukhitosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When in a state of pleasure, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of pleasure.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannaṃ sukhindriyaṃ taṃ nirujjhati, taṃ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as pleasant, you understand that the corresponding faculty of pleasure ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculty of pain arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dukkhitova samāno ‘dukkhitosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When in a state of pain, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of pain.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva dukkhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ dukkhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannaṃ dukkhindriyaṃ taṃ nirujjhati, taṃ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as painful, you understand that the corresponding faculty of pain ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Somanassavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati somanassindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculty of happiness arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sumanova samāno ‘sumanosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When in a state of happiness, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of happiness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva somanassavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ somanassavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannaṃ somanassindriyaṃ taṃ nirujjhati, taṃ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as happiness, you understand that the corresponding faculty of happiness ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Domanassavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati domanassindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculty of sadness arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dummanova samāno ‘dummanosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When in a state of sadness, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of sadness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva domanassavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ domanassavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannaṃ domanassindriyaṃ taṃ nirujjhati, taṃ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as sadness, you understand that the corresponding faculty of sadness ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upekkhāvedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati upekkhindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculty of equanimity arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as equanimous. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So upekkhakova samāno ‘upekkhakosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When in a state of equanimity, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of equanimity.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva upekkhāvedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ upekkhāvedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannaṃ upekkhindriyaṃ taṃ nirujjhati, taṃ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as equanimous, you understand that the corresponding faculty of equanimity ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ kaṭṭhānaṃ saṅghaṭṭanasamodhānā usmā jāyati, tejo abhinibbattati; tesaṃyeva kaṭṭhānaṃ nānābhāvāvinikkhepā yā tajjā usmā sā nirujjhati sā vūpasammati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any corresponding heat ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the faculty of pleasure arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhitova samāno ‘sukhitosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When in a state of pleasure, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of pleasure.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhindriyaṃ taṃ nirujjhati, taṃ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as pleasant, you understand that the corresponding faculty of pleasure ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculty of pain … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">somanassavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">happiness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">domanassavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">sadness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāvedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati upekkhindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">equanimity arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as equanimous. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So upekkhakova samāno ‘upekkhakosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When in a state of equanimity, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of equanimity.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva upekkhāvedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ upekkhāvedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati upekkhindriyaṃ taṃ nirujjhati, taṃ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as equanimous, you understand that the corresponding faculty of equanimity ceases and stops.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
