<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.049-49. Piṇḍolabhāradvājasutta  - 49. About Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.049. 49. Piṇḍolabhāradvājasutta  - 49. About Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Jarāvagga  - 5. Old Age </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosambiyaṃ viharati ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmatā piṇḍolabhāradvājena aññā byākatā hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja had declared enlightenment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. Then they said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āyasmatā, bhante, piṇḍolabhāradvājena aññā byākatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ nu kho, bhante, atthavasaṃ sampassamānena āyasmatā piṇḍolabhāradvājena aññā byākatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What reason does Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja see for doing this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tiṇṇannaṃ kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā piṇḍolabhāradvājena bhikkhunā aññā byākatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s because Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja has developed and cultivated three faculties that he declares enlightenment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.”’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ tiṇṇannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satindriyassa, samādhindriyassa, paññindriyassa—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tiṇṇannaṃ indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā piṇḍolabhāradvājena bhikkhunā aññā byākatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja has developed and cultivated these three faculties that he declares enlightenment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni ca, bhikkhave, tīṇindriyāni kimantāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s the culmination of these three faculties? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khayantāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They culminate in ending. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kissa khayantāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the ending of what? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātijarāmaraṇassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of rebirth, old age, and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Jātijarāmaraṇaṃ khayan’ti kho, bhikkhave, sampassamānena piṇḍolabhāradvājena bhikkhunā aññā byākatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because he sees that they culminate in the ending of rebirth, old age, and death that Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja declares enlightenment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
