<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.052-52. Mallikasutta  - 52. In the Land of the Mallas </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.052. 52. Mallikasutta  - 52. In the Land of the Mallas </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sūkarakhatavagga  - 6. The Boar’s Cave </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā mallesu viharati uruvelakappaṃ nāma mallānaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Mallas, near the Mallian town called Uruvelakappa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa ariyañāṇaṃ na uppannaṃ hoti neva tāva catunnaṃ indriyānaṃ saṇṭhiti hoti, neva tāva catunnaṃ indriyānaṃ avaṭṭhiti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, as long as noble knowledge hasn’t arisen for a noble disciple the four faculties are not stable and fixed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa ariyañāṇaṃ uppannaṃ hoti, atha catunnaṃ indriyānaṃ saṇṭhiti hoti, atha catunnaṃ indriyānaṃ avaṭṭhiti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when noble knowledge has arisen for a noble disciple the four faculties become stable and fixed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yāvakīvañca kūṭāgārassa kūṭaṃ na ussitaṃ hoti, neva tāva gopānasīnaṃ saṇṭhiti hoti, neva tāva gopānasīnaṃ avaṭṭhiti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s just like in a bungalow. As long as the roof peak is not lifted into place, the rafters are not stable or fixed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, kūṭāgārassa kūṭaṃ ussitaṃ hoti, atha gopānasīnaṃ saṇṭhiti hoti, atha gopānasīnaṃ avaṭṭhiti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when the roof peak is lifted into place, the rafters become stable and fixed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yāvakīvañca ariyasāvakassa ariyañāṇaṃ na uppannaṃ hoti, neva tāva catunnaṃ indriyānaṃ saṇṭhiti hoti, neva tāva catunnaṃ indriyānaṃ avaṭṭhiti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, as long as noble knowledge hasn’t arisen for a noble disciple the four faculties are not stable and fixed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa ariyañāṇaṃ uppannaṃ hoti, atha catunnaṃ indriyānaṃ … pe … avaṭṭhiti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when noble knowledge has arisen for a noble disciple the four faculties become stable and fixed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhindriyassa, vīriyindriyassa, satindriyassa, samādhindriyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññavato, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa tadanvayā saddhā saṇṭhāti, tadanvayaṃ vīriyaṃ saṇṭhāti, tadanvayā sati saṇṭhāti, tadanvayo samādhi saṇṭhātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has wisdom, the faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion that follow along with that become stabilized.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
