<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.046-46. Dutiyapubbārāmasutta  - 46. At the Eastern Monastery (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.046. 46. Dutiyapubbārāmasutta  - 46. At the Eastern Monastery (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Jarāvagga  - 5. Old Age </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃyeva nidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The same setting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katinaṃ nu kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṃ byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, how many faculties must a mendicant develop and cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence”’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dvinnaṃ kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṃ byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A mendicant must develop and cultivate two faculties so that they can declare enlightenment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ dvinnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyāya ca paññāya, ariyāya ca vimuttiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Noble wisdom and noble freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā hissa, bhikkhave, ariyā paññā tadassa paññindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For their noble wisdom is the faculty of wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā hissa, bhikkhave, ariyā vimutti tadassa samādhindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And their noble freedom is the faculty of immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṃ byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two faculties that a mendicant must develop and cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence”’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
