<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.057-57. Sahampatibrahmasutta  - 57. With Brahmā Sahampati </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.057. 57. Sahampatibrahmasutta  - 57. With Brahmā Sahampati </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sūkarakhatavagga  - 6. The Boar’s Cave </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā uruvelāyaṃ viharati najjā nerañjarāya tīre ajapālanigrodhe paṭhamābhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time, when he was first awakened, the Buddha was staying near Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pañcindriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni amatogadhāni honti amataparāyaṇāni amatapariyosānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end in the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of faith, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyindriyaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satindriyaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mindfulness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhindriyaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni pañcindriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni amatogadhāni honti amataparāyaṇāni amatapariyosānānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end in the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati bhagavato cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya—seyyathāpi nāma balavā puriso samiñjitaṃ vā bāhaṃ pasāreyya, pasāritaṃ vā bāhaṃ samiñjeyya; evameva brahmaloke antarahito bhagavato purato pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmā Sahampati knew what the Buddha was thinking. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the Brahmā realm and reappeared in front of the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“evametaṃ, bhagavā, evametaṃ sugata. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcindriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni amatogadhāni honti amataparāyaṇāni amatapariyosānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end in the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni pañcindriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni amatogadhāni honti amataparāyaṇāni amatapariyosānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end in the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtapubbāhaṃ, bhante, kassape sammāsambuddhe brahmacariyaṃ acariṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once upon a time, sir, I lived the spiritual life under the fully awakened Buddha Kassapa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrapi maṃ evaṃ jānanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There they knew me as </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sahako bhikkhu, sahako bhikkhū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mendicant Sahaka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, bhante, imesaṃyeva pañcannaṃ indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā kāmesu kāmacchandaṃ virājetvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ brahmalokaṃ upapanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of developing and cultivating these same five faculties I lost desire for sensual pleasures. When my body broke up, after death, I was reborn in a good place, in the Brahmā realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrapi maṃ evaṃ jānanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There they know me as </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘brahmā sahampati, brahmā sahampatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Brahmā Sahampati. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ, bhagavā, evametaṃ sugata. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahametaṃ jānāmi, ahametaṃ passāmi yathā imāni pañcindriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni amatogadhāni honti amataparāyaṇāni amatapariyosānānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I know and see how when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end in the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
