<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.029-29. Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta  - 29. Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.029. 29. Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta  - 29. Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Chaḷindriyavagga  - 3. The Six Faculties </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chayimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these six faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhundriyaṃ, sotindriyaṃ, ghānindriyaṃ, jivhindriyaṃ, kāyindriyaṃ, manindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā imesaṃ channaṃ indriyānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand the origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these six faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me te, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu vā samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu vā brāhmaṇasammatā, na ca panete āyasmanto sāmaññatthaṃ vā brahmaññatthaṃ vā diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā imesaṃ channaṃ indriyānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these six faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te kho me, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu ceva samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu ca brāhmaṇasammatā, te ca panāyasmanto sāmaññatthañca brahmaññatthañca diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
