<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.019-19. Sampannasutta  - 19. Endowed </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.019. 19. Sampannasutta  - 19. Endowed </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Mudutaravagga  - 2. Weaker </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Indriyasampanno, indriyasampanno’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of someone who is ‘accomplished regarding the faculties’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, indriyasampanno hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is someone accomplished regarding the faculties defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, bhikkhu saddhindriyaṃ bhāveti upasamagāmiṃ sambodhagāmiṃ, vīriyindriyaṃ bhāveti upasamagāmiṃ sambodhagāmiṃ, satindriyaṃ bhāveti upasamagāmiṃ sambodhagāmiṃ, samādhindriyaṃ bhāveti upasamagāmiṃ sambodhagāmiṃ, paññindriyaṃ bhāveti upasamagāmiṃ sambodhagāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, it’s when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom that lead to peace and awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, bhikkhu, bhikkhu indriyasampanno hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how someone who is accomplished regarding the faculties is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
