<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.067-67. Paṭhamarukkhasutta  - 67. A Tree (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.067. 67. Paṭhamarukkhasutta  - 67. A Tree (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Bodhipakkhiyavagga  - 7. Leading to Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci jambudīpakā rukkhā, jambū tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, of all the trees in India, the rose-apple is said to be the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṃ—bodhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyā dhammā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhindriyaṃ, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṃ bodhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of faith, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyindriyaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satindriyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mindfulness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhindriyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññindriyaṃ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṃ bodhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and wisdom are qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci jambudīpakā rukkhā, jambū tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of all the trees in India, the rose-apple is said to be the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṃ—bodhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
