<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.064-64. Āsavakkhayasutta  - 64. Ending of Defilements </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.064. 64. Āsavakkhayasutta  - 64. Ending of Defilements </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Bodhipakkhiyavagga  - 7. Leading to Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhindriyaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni saṃyojanappahānāya saṃvattanti, anusayasamugghātāya saṃvattanti, addhānapariññāya saṃvattanti, āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies, completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhindriyaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni saṃyojanappahānāya saṃvattanti, anusayasamugghātāya saṃvattanti, addhānapariññāya saṃvattanti, āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies, completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
