<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.051-51. Sālasutta  - 51. At Sālā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.051. 51. Sālasutta  - 51. At Sālā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sūkarakhatavagga  - 6. The Boar’s Cave </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu viharati sālāya brāhmaṇagāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans near the brahmin village of Sālā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci tiracchānagatā pāṇā, sīho migarājā tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṃ—thāmena javena sūrena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the lion, king of beasts, is said to be the best of animals in terms of strength, speed, and courage. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṃ—bodhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyā dhammā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhindriyaṃ, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṃ bodhāya saṃvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of faith, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyindriyaṃ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṃ bodhāya saṃvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satindriyaṃ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṃ bodhāya saṃvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">mindfulness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhindriyaṃ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṃ bodhāya saṃvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññindriyaṃ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṃ bodhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and wisdom are qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci tiracchānagatā pāṇā, sīho migarājā tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṃ—thāmena javena sūrena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The lion, king of beasts, is said to be the best of animals in terms of strength, speed, and courage. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṃ—bodhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
