<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>49.35-44-35–44. Esanādisuttadasaka  - 35–44. Ten Discourses on Searches, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">49.35-44. 35–44. Esanādisuttadasaka  - 35–44. Ten Discourses on Searches, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Esanāvagga  - 4. Searches </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, esanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmesanā, bhavesanā, brahmacariyesanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The search for sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search for a spiritual path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso esanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṃ esanānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya cattāro sammappadhānā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The four right efforts should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anuppannānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṃ esanānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ime cattāro sammappadhānā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four right efforts should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three searches.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Vitthāretabbaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in SN 45.161–170.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esanāvaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esanā vidhā āsavo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Searches, discriminations, defilements, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavo ca dukkhatā tisso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">states of existence, three kinds of suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khilaṃ malañca nīgho ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">barrenness, stains, and troubles, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā taṇhā tasinā cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings, craving, and thirst.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
