<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.15-15. Uṇṇābhabrāhmaṇasutta  - 15. The Brahmin Uṇṇābha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.15. 15. Uṇṇābhabrāhmaṇasutta  - 15. The Brahmin Uṇṇābha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Pāsādakampanavagga  - 2. Shaking the Stilt Longhouse </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ānando kosambiyaṃ viharati ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uṇṇābho brāhmaṇo yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā ānandena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Uṇṇābha the brahmin went up to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho uṇṇābho brāhmaṇo āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kimatthiyaṃ nu kho, bho ānanda, samaṇe gotame brahmacariyaṃ vussatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Ānanda, what’s the purpose of living the spiritual life with the ascetic Gotama?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chandappahānatthaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ vussatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The purpose of living the spiritual life under the Buddha, brahmin, is to give up desire.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi pana, bho ānanda, maggo atthi paṭipadā etassa chandassa pahānāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But is there a path and a practice for giving up that desire?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi kho, brāhmaṇa, maggo, atthi paṭipadā etassa chandassa pahānāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo pana, bho ānanda, maggo katamā paṭipadā etassa chandassa pahānāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is that path?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, brāhmaṇa, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mental development … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā etassa chandassa pahānāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the path and the practice for giving up that desire.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ sante, bho ānanda, santakaṃ hoti no asantakaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This being the case, Master Ānanda, the path is endless, not finite. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandeneva chandaṃ pajahissatīti—netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For it’s not possible to give up desire by means of desire.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, brāhmaṇa, taññevettha paṭipucchissāmi. Yathā te khameyya tathā taṃ byākareyyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, brahmin, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, brāhmaṇa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, brahmin? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahosi te pubbe chando ‘ārāmaṃ gamissāmī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Have you ever had a desire to walk to the park, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa te ārāmagatassa yo tajjo chando so paṭippassaddho”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">but when you arrived at the park, the corresponding desire faded away?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahosi te pubbe vīriyaṃ ‘ārāmaṃ gamissāmī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Have you ever had the energy to walk to the park, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa te ārāmagatassa yaṃ tajjaṃ vīriyaṃ taṃ paṭippassaddhan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">but when you arrived at the park, the corresponding energy faded away?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahosi te pubbe cittaṃ ‘ārāmaṃ gamissāmī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Have you ever had the idea to walk to the park, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa te ārāmagatassa yaṃ tajjaṃ cittaṃ taṃ paṭippassaddhan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">but when you arrived at the park, the corresponding idea faded away?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahosi te pubbe vīmaṃsā ‘ārāmaṃ gamissāmī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Have you ever inquired regarding a walk to the park, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa te ārāmagatassa yā tajjā vīmaṃsā sā paṭippassaddhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">but when you arrived at the park, the corresponding inquiry faded away?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, brāhmaṇa, yo so bhikkhu arahaṃ khīṇāsavo vusitavā katakaraṇīyo ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojano sammadaññāvimutto, tassa yo pubbe chando ahosi arahattappattiyā, arahattappatte yo tajjo chando so paṭippassaddho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, take a mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and is rightly freed through enlightenment. They formerly had the desire to attain perfection, but when they attained perfection the corresponding desire faded away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ pubbe vīriyaṃ ahosi arahattappattiyā, arahattappatte yaṃ tajjaṃ vīriyaṃ taṃ paṭippassaddhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They formerly had the energy to attain perfection, but when they attained perfection the corresponding energy faded away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ pubbe cittaṃ ahosi arahattappattiyā, arahattappatte yaṃ tajjaṃ cittaṃ taṃ paṭippassaddhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They formerly had the idea to attain perfection, but when they attained perfection the corresponding idea faded away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā pubbe vīmaṃsā ahosi arahattappattiyā, arahattappatte yā tajjā vīmaṃsā sā paṭippassaddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They formerly inquired regarding attaining perfection, but when they attained perfection the corresponding inquiry faded away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, brāhmaṇa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, brahmin? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti evaṃ sante, santakaṃ vā hoti no asantakaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being the case, is the path endless or finite?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Addhā, bho ānanda, evaṃ sante, santakaṃ hoti no asantakaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Clearly, Master Ānanda, this being the case, the path is finite, not endless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkantaṃ, bho ānanda, abhikkantaṃ, bho ānanda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, Master Ānanda! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho ānanda, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā ānandena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Ānanda has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ, bho ānanda, taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ ānando dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Ānanda remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
