<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.21-21. Maggasutta  - 21. The Path </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.21. 21. Maggasutta  - 21. The Path </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Ayoguḷavagga  - 3. The Iron Ball </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbeva me, bhikkhave, sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ko nu kho maggo, kā paṭipadā iddhipādabhāvanāyā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the path and practice for developing the bases of psychic power?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idha bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti me chando na ca atilīno bhavissati, na ca atippaggahito bhavissati, na ca ajjhattaṃ saṃkhitto bhavissati, na ca bahiddhā vikkhitto bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: “My enthusiasm won’t be too lax or too tense. And it’ll be neither constricted internally nor scattered externally.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchāpuresaññī ca viharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they meditate perceiving continuity: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā pure tathā pacchā, yathā pacchā tathā pure; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as before, so after; as after, so before; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā adho tathā uddhaṃ, yathā uddhaṃ tathā adho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as below, so above; as above, so below; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā divā tathā rattiṃ, yathā rattiṃ tathā divā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti vivaṭena cetasā apariyonaddhena sappabhāsaṃ cittaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that’s full of radiance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mental development … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti me vīmaṃsā na ca atilīnā bhavissati, na ca atippaggahitā bhavissati, na ca ajjhattaṃ saṃkhittā bhavissati, na ca bahiddhā vikkhittā bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: “My inquiry won’t be too lax or too tense. And it’ll be neither constricted internally nor scattered externally.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchāpuresaññī ca viharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they meditate perceiving continuity: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā pure tathā pacchā, yathā pacchā tathā pure; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as before, so after; as after, so before; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā adho tathā uddhaṃ, yathā uddhaṃ tathā adho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as below, so above; as above, so below; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā divā tathā rattiṃ yathā rattiṃ tathā divā’—</span></p>
<p class="p3">as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vivaṭena cetasā apariyonaddhena sappabhāsaṃ cittaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that’s full of radiance.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitesu kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu catūsu iddhipādesu evaṃ bahulīkatesu anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhoti—ekopi hutvā bahudhā hoti, bahudhāpi hutvā eko hoti … pe … yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vatteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated in this way, a mendicant wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again … controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitesu kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu catūsu iddhipādesu evaṃ bahulīkatesu, āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated in this way, they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Chapi abhiññāyo vitthāretabbā.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(The six direct knowledges should also be expanded.)</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
