<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.13-13. Chandasamādhisutta  - 13. Immersion Due to Enthusiasm </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.13. 13. Chandasamādhisutta  - 13. Immersion Due to Enthusiasm </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Pāsādakampanavagga  - 2. Shaking the Stilt Longhouse </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chandañce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nissāya labhati samādhiṃ, labhati cittassa ekaggataṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if a mendicant depends on enthusiasm in order to gain immersion, gain unification of mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati chandasamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called immersion due to enthusiasm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ anuppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti ‘padhānasaṅkhārā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called active efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti ayañca chando, ayañca chandasamādhi, ime ca padhānasaṅkhārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so there is this enthusiasm, this immersion due to enthusiasm, and these active efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgato iddhipādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyañce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nissāya labhati samādhiṃ, labhati cittassa ekaggataṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant depends on energy in order to gain immersion, gain unification of mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati ‘vīriyasamādhi’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called immersion due to energy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anuppannānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti ‘padhānasaṅkhārā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called active efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti idañca vīriyaṃ, ayañca vīriyasamādhi, ime ca padhānasaṅkhārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so there is this energy, this immersion due to energy, and these active efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vīriyasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgato iddhipādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittañce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nissāya labhati samādhiṃ, labhati cittassa ekaggataṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant depends on mental development in order to gain immersion, gain unification of mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati ‘cittasamādhi’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called immersion due to mental development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti ‘padhānasaṅkhārā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called active efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti idañca cittaṃ, ayañca cittasamādhi, ime ca padhānasaṅkhārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so there is this mental development, this immersion due to mental development, and these active efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, cittasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgato iddhipādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīmaṃsañce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nissāya labhati samādhiṃ, labhati cittassa ekaggataṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant depends on inquiry in order to gain immersion, gain unification of mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati ‘vīmaṃsāsamādhi’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called immersion due to inquiry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ anuppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti ‘padhānasaṅkhārā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called active efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti ayañca vīmaṃsā, ayañca vīmaṃsāsamādhi, ime ca padhānasaṅkhārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so there is this inquiry, this immersion due to inquiry, and these active efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgato iddhipādo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
