<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.18-18. Bhikkhusutta  - 18. A Mendicant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.18. 18. Bhikkhusutta  - 18. A Mendicant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Pāsādakampanavagga  - 2. Shaking the Stilt Longhouse </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catunnaṃ, bhikkhave, iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mental development … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
