<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.02-2. Viraddhasutta  - 2. Missed Out </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.02. 2. Viraddhasutta  - 2. Missed Out </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cāpālavagga  - 1. At the Cāpāla Shrine </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, cattāro iddhipādā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the four bases of psychic power has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, cattāro iddhipādā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has undertaken the four bases of psychic power has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mental development … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime cattāro iddhipādā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has missed out on these four bases of psychic power has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime cattāro iddhipādā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has undertaken these four bases of psychic power has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
