<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.14-14. Moggallānasutta  - 14. With Moggallāna </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.14. 14. Moggallānasutta  - 14. With Moggallāna </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Pāsādakampanavagga  - 2. Shaking the Stilt Longhouse </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū heṭṭhāmigāramātupāsāde viharanti uddhatā unnaḷā capalā mukharā vikiṇṇavācā muṭṭhassatino asampajānā asamāhitā bhantacittā pākatindriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time several mendicants were staying beneath the longhouse. They were restless, insolent, fickle, gossipy, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ mahāmoggallānaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha addressed Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ete kho, moggallāna, sabrahmacārino heṭṭhāmigāramātupāsāde viharanti uddhatā unnaḷā capalā mukharā vikiṇṇavācā muṭṭhassatino asampajānā asamāhitā bhantacittā pākatindriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These spiritual companions of yours staying beneath the longhouse are restless, insolent, fickle, gossipy, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with wandering mind and undisciplined faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaccha, moggallāna, te bhikkhū saṃvejehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Go, Moggallāna, and strike awe in those mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā mahāmoggallāno bhagavato paṭissutvā tathārūpaṃ iddhābhisaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkhāresi yathā pādaṅguṭṭhakena migāramātupāsādaṃ saṅkampesi sampakampesi sampacālesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Mahāmoggallāna. Then he used his psychic power to make the longhouse shake and rock and tremble with his toe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū saṃviggā lomahaṭṭhajātā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those mendicants stood to one side, shocked and awestruck. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ vata bho, abbhutaṃ vata bho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nivātañca vata ayañca migāramātupāsādo gambhīranemo sunikhāto acalo asampakampī, atha ca pana saṅkampito sampakampito sampacālito”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s no wind at all; and this stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother has deep foundations. It’s firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. And yet it shakes and rocks and trembles!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā yena te bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te bhikkhū bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha went up to those mendicants and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu tumhe, bhikkhave, saṃviggā lomahaṭṭhajātā ekamantaṃ ṭhitā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why do you, mendicants, stand to one side, shocked and awestruck?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nivātañca vata ayañca migāramātupāsādo gambhīranemo sunikhāto acalo asampakampī, atha ca pana saṅkampito sampakampito sampacālito”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s no wind at all; and this stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother has deep foundations. It’s firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. And yet it shakes and rocks and trembles!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tumheva kho, bhikkhave, saṃvejetukāmena moggallānena bhikkhunā pādaṅguṭṭhakena migāramātupāsādo, saṅkampito sampakampito sampacālito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wanting to strike awe in you, the mendicant Moggallāna made the longhouse shake and rock and tremble with his toe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamesaṃ dhammānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā moggallāno bhikkhu evaṃmahiddhiko evaṃmahānubhāvo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What things has the mendicant Moggallāna developed and cultivated so as to have such power and might?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā, bhagavaṃnettikā bhagavaṃpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu vata, bhante, bhagavantaṃyeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhikkhave, suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, mendicants, listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṃ kho, bhikkhave, iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā moggallāno bhikkhu evaṃmahiddhiko evaṃmahānubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, moggallāno bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Moggallāna develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mental development … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti me vīmaṃsā na ca atilīnā bhavissati, na ca atippaggahitā bhavissati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He thinks: ‘My inquiry won’t be too lax or too tense. And it’ll be neither constricted internally nor scattered externally.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca ajjhattaṃ saṅkhittā bhavissati, na ca bahiddhā vikkhittā bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchāpuresaññī ca viharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he meditates perceiving continuity: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā pure tathā pacchā, yathā pacchā tathā pure; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as before, so after; as after, so before; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā adho tathā uddhaṃ, yathā uddhaṃ tathā adho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as below, so above; as above, so below; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā divā tathā rattiṃ, yathā rattiṃ tathā divā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti vivaṭena cetasā apariyonaddhena sappabhāsaṃ cittaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he develops a mind that’s full of radiance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā moggallāno bhikkhu evaṃmahiddhiko evaṃmahānubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesañca pana, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā moggallāno bhikkhu anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhoti … pe … yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vatteti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the mendicant Moggallāna wields the many kinds of psychic power … controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imesañca pana, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā moggallāno bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the mendicant Moggallāna realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And he lives having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
