<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.26-26. Dutiyaphalasutta  - 26. Fruits (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.26. 26. Dutiyaphalasutta  - 26. Fruits (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Ayoguḷavagga  - 3. The Iron Ball </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, iddhipādā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mental development … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro iddhipādā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā satta phalā sattānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, seven fruits and benefits can be expected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta phalā sattānisaṃsā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṃ ārādheti </span></p>
<p class="p3">They attain enlightenment early on in this very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṃ ārādheti; atha maraṇakāle aññaṃ ārādheti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If not, they attain enlightenment at the time of death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṃ ārādheti, no ce maraṇakāle aññaṃ ārādheti; atha pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā antarāparinibbāyī hoti, upahaccaparinibbāyī hoti, asaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti, sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti, uddhaṃsoto hoti akaniṭṭhagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters, they’re extinguished between one life and the next … they’re extinguished upon landing … they’re extinguished without extra effort … they’re extinguished with extra effort … they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā ime satta phalā sattānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, these seven fruits and benefits can be expected.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
