<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>52.08-8. Salaḷāgārasutta  - 8. The Frankincense-Tree Hut </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">52.08. 8. Salaḷāgārasutta  - 8. The Frankincense-Tree Hut </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Rahogatavagga  - 1. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā anuruddho sāvatthiyaṃ viharati salaḷāgāre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the frankincense-tree hut. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho āyasmā anuruddho bhikkhū āmantesi … pe … etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There Venerable Anuruddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“seyyathāpi, āvuso, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, suppose that, although the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha mahājanakāyo āgaccheyya kudālapiṭakaṃ ādāya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">a large crowd were to come along with a spade and basket, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mayaṃ imaṃ gaṅgānadiṃ pacchāninnaṃ karissāma pacchāpoṇaṃ pacchāpabbhāran’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We’ll make this Ganges river slant, slope, and incline to the west!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññathāvuso, api nu so mahājanakāyo gaṅgānadiṃ pacchāninnaṃ kareyya pacchāpoṇaṃ pacchāpabbhāran”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, reverends? Would they succeed?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, reverend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kissa hetu”? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gaṅgā, āvuso, nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na sukarā pacchāninnaṃ kātuṃ pacchāpoṇaṃ pacchāpabbhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline to the west. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvadeva ca pana so mahājanakāyo kilamathassa vighātassa bhāgī assā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That large crowd will eventually get weary and frustrated.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, āvuso, bhikkhuṃ cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāventaṃ cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bahulīkarontaṃ rājāno vā rājamahāmattā vā mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā bhogehi abhihaṭṭhuṃ pavāreyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, while a mendicant develops and cultivates the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, if rulers or their ministers, friends or colleagues, relatives or family should invite them to accept wealth, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ehambho purisa, kiṃ te ime kāsāvā anudahanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, mister, why let these ocher robes torment you? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ muṇḍo kapālamanusañcarasi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms bowl? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ehi hīnāyāvattitvā bhoge ca bhuñjassu puññāni ca karohī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vata, āvuso, bhikkhu cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāvento cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bahulīkaronto sikkhaṃ paccakkhāya hīnāyāvattissatīti—netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s simply impossible for a mendicant who is developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation to reject the training and return to a lesser life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi taṃ, āvuso, cittaṃ dīgharattaṃ vivekaninnaṃ vivekapoṇaṃ vivekapabbhāraṃ taṃ vata hīnāyāvattissatīti—netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because for a long time that mendicant’s mind has slanted, sloped, and inclined to seclusion. So it’s impossible for them to return to a lesser life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcāvuso, bhikkhu cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāveti, cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bahulīkarotīti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, āvuso, bhikkhu cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāveti, cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bahulīkarotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant develops and cultivates the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
