<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>52.09-9. Ambapālivanasutta  - 9. In Ambapālī’s Wood </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">52.09. 9. Ambapālivanasutta  - 9. In Ambapālī’s Wood </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Rahogatavagga  - 1. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca anuruddho āyasmā ca sāriputto vesāliyaṃ viharanti ambapālivane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the venerables Anuruddha and Sāriputta were staying near Vesālī, in Ambapālī’s Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Anuruddha, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vippasannāni kho te, āvuso anuruddha, indriyāni, parisuddho mukhavaṇṇo pariyodāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Anuruddha, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamenāyasmā anuruddho vihārena etarahi bahulaṃ viharatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What kind of meditation are you usually practicing these days?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūsu khvāhaṃ, āvuso, satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacitto etarahi bahulaṃ viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These days, reverend, I usually meditate with my mind firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesu catūsu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāhaṃ, āvuso, kāye kāyānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I meditate observing an aspect of the body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imesu khvāhaṃ, āvuso, catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacitto etarahi bahulaṃ viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These days I usually meditate with my mind firmly established in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, āvuso, bhikkhu arahaṃ khīṇāsavo vusitavā katakaraṇīyo ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojano sammadaññāvimutto, so imesu catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacitto bahulaṃ viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and is rightly freed through enlightenment—usually meditates with their mind firmly established in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lābhā vata no, āvuso, suladdhaṃ vata no, āvuso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“We’re so fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye mayaṃ āyasmato anuruddhassa sammukhāva assumha āsabhiṃ vācaṃ bhāsamānassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to have heard such a dramatic statement in the presence of Venerable Anuruddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
