<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>52.05-5. Dutiyakaṇḍakīsutta  - 5. At Thorny Wood (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">52.05. 5. Dutiyakaṇḍakīsutta  - 5. At Thorny Wood (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Rahogatavagga  - 1. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāketanidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāketa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta said to Anuruddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“asekhenāvuso anuruddha, bhikkhunā katame dhammā upasampajja vihātabbā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Anuruddha, what things should a mendicant who is an adept enter and remain in?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Asekhenāvuso sāriputta, bhikkhunā cattāro satipaṭṭhānā upasampajja vihātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, a mendicant who is an adept should enter and remain in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asekhenāvuso sāriputta, bhikkhunā ime cattāro satipaṭṭhānā upasampajja vihātabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who is an adept should enter and remain in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
