<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>52.03-3. Sutanusutta  - 3. On the Bank of the Sutanu </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">52.03. 3. Sutanusutta  - 3. On the Bank of the Sutanu </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Rahogatavagga  - 1. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā anuruddho sāvatthiyaṃ viharati sutanutīre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī on the bank of the Sutanu. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yenāyasmā anuruddho tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā anuruddhena saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to Venerable Anuruddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katamesaṃ āyasmā anuruddho dhammānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā mahābhiññataṃ patto”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What things has Venerable Anuruddha developed and cultivated to attain great direct knowledge?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catunnaṃ khvāhaṃ, āvuso, satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā mahābhiññataṃ patto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, I attained great direct knowledge by developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāhaṃ, āvuso, kāye kāyānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imesaṃ khvāhaṃ, āvuso, catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā mahābhiññataṃ patto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I attained great direct knowledge by developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesañca panāhaṃ, āvuso, catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā hīnaṃ dhammaṃ hīnato abbhaññāsiṃ, majjhimaṃ dhammaṃ majjhimato abbhaññāsiṃ, paṇītaṃ dhammaṃ paṇītato abbhaññāsin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And it was by developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that I directly knew the lower realm as lower, the middle realm as middle, and the higher realm as higher.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
