<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>52.01-1. Paṭhamarahogatasutta  - 1. In Private (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">52.01. 1. Paṭhamarahogatasutta  - 1. In Private (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Rahogatavagga  - 1. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā anuruddho sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato anuruddhassa rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then as Anuruddha was in private retreat this thought came to his mind: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yesaṃ kesañci cattāro satipaṭṭhānā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whoever has missed out on these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci cattāro satipaṭṭhānā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has undertaken these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahāmoggallāno āyasmato anuruddhassa cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya—seyyathāpi nāma balavā puriso samiñjitaṃ vā bāhaṃ pasāreyya, pasāritaṃ vā bāhaṃ samiñjeyya; evameva—āyasmato anuruddhassa sammukhe pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna knew what Venerable Anuruddha was thinking. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he reappeared in front of Anuruddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahāmoggallāno āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kittāvatā nu kho, āvuso anuruddha, bhikkhuno cattāro satipaṭṭhānā āraddhā hontī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Anuruddha, how do you define the undertaking of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso, bhikkhu ajjhattaṃ kāye samudayadhammānupassī viharati, ajjhattaṃ kāye vayadhammānupassī viharati, ajjhattaṃ kāye samudayavayadhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, it’s when a mendicant meditates observing the body internally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahiddhā kāye samudayadhammānupassī viharati, bahiddhā kāye vayadhammānupassī viharati, bahiddhā kāye samudayavayadhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing the body externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattabahiddhā kāye samudayadhammānupassī viharati, ajjhattabahiddhā kāye vayadhammānupassī viharati, ajjhattabahiddhā kāye samudayavayadhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing the body internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘appaṭikūle paṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, paṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace ākaṅkhati: ‘paṭikūle appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, appaṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,’ that’s what they do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace ākaṅkhati: ‘appaṭikūle ca paṭikūle ca paṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, paṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,’ that’s what they do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace ākaṅkhati: ‘paṭikūle ca appaṭikūle ca appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, appaṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace ākaṅkhati: ‘appaṭikūlañca paṭikūlañca tadubhayaṃ abhinivajjetvā upekkhako vihareyyaṃ sato sampajāno’ti, upekkhako tattha viharati sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattaṃ vedanāsu samudayadhammānupassī viharati, ajjhattaṃ vedanāsu vayadhammānupassī viharati, ajjhattaṃ vedanāsu samudayavayadhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing feelings internally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahiddhā vedanāsu samudayadhammānupassī viharati, bahiddhā vedanāsu vayadhammānupassī viharati, bahiddhā vedanāsu samudayavayadhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattabahiddhā vedanāsu samudayadhammānupassī viharati, ajjhattabahiddhā vedanāsu vayadhammānupassī viharati, ajjhattabahiddhā vedanāsu samudayavayadhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate and vanish … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘appaṭikūle paṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, paṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace ākaṅkhati: ‘paṭikūle appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, appaṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace ākaṅkhati: ‘appaṭikūle ca paṭikūle ca paṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, paṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace ākaṅkhati: ‘paṭikūle ca appaṭikūle ca appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, appaṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace ākaṅkhati: ‘appaṭikūlañca paṭikūlañca tadubhayaṃ abhinivajjetvā upekkhako vihareyyaṃ sato sampajāno’ti, upekkhako tattha viharati sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattaṃ citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing the mind internally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahiddhā citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattabahiddhā citte samudayadhammānupassī viharati … ajjhattabahiddhā citte vayadhammānupassī viharati … ajjhattabahiddhā citte samudayavayadhammānupassī viharati ātāpī … pe … abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate and vanish … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘appaṭikūle paṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, paṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhako tattha viharati sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattaṃ dhammesu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing principles internally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahiddhā dhammesu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattabahiddhā dhammesu samudayadhammānupassī viharati … ajjhattabahiddhā dhammesu vayadhammānupassī viharati … ajjhattabahiddhā dhammesu samudayavayadhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate and vanish … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘appaṭikūle paṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, paṭikūlasaññī tattha viharati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhako tattha viharati sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, ignoring both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, āvuso, bhikkhuno cattāro satipaṭṭhānā āraddhā hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to define the undertaking of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
