<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>54.06-6. Ariṭṭhasutta  - 6. With Ariṭṭha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">54.06. 6. Ariṭṭhasutta  - 6. With Ariṭṭha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ekadhammavagga  - 1. One Thing </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā … pe … etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha … said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhāvetha no tumhe bhikkhave, ānāpānassatin”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, do you develop mindfulness of breathing?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā ariṭṭho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Ariṭṭha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṃ kho, bhante, bhāvemi ānāpānassatin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I develop mindfulness of breathing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana tvaṃ, ariṭṭha, bhāvesi ānāpānassatin”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But mendicant, how do you develop it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atītesu me, bhante, kāmesu kāmacchando pahīno, anāgatesu me kāmesu kāmacchando vigato, ajjhattabahiddhā ca me dhammesu paṭighasaññā suppaṭivinītā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’ve given up desire for sensual pleasures of the past. I’m rid of desire for sensual pleasures of the future. And I have eliminated perception of repulsion regarding phenomena internally and externally. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So satova assasissāmi, satova passasissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just mindful, I will breathe in. Mindful, I will breathe out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhāvemi ānāpānassatin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how I develop mindfulness of breathing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Atthesā, ariṭṭha, ānāpānassati, nesā natthī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That is mindfulness of breathing, Ariṭṭha; I don’t deny it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca, ariṭṭha, yathā ānāpānassati vitthārena paripuṇṇā hoti </span></p>
<p class="p3">But as to how mindfulness of breathing is fulfilled in detail, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ariṭṭho bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Ariṭṭha replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathañca, ariṭṭha, ānāpānassati vitthārena paripuṇṇā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And how is mindfulness of breathing fulfilled in detail? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, ariṭṭha, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut. They sit down cross-legged, with their body straight, and establish mindfulness right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So satova assasati, satova passasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīghaṃ vā assasanto ‘dīghaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ When breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ariṭṭha, ānāpānassati vitthārena paripuṇṇā hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how mindfulness of breathing is fulfilled in detail.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
