<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>54.05-5. Dutiyaphalasutta  - 5. Fruits (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">54.05. 5. Dutiyaphalasutta  - 5. Fruits (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ekadhammavagga  - 1. One Thing </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ānāpānassati, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati kathaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut. They sit down cross-legged, with their body straight, and establish mindfulness right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So satova assasati, satova passasati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati evaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very fruitful and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitāya kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatiyā evaṃ bahulīkatāya satta phalā sattānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect seven fruits and benefits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta phalā sattānisaṃsā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṃ ārādheti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You attain enlightenment early on in this very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṃ ārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha maraṇakāle aññaṃ ārādheti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If not, you attain enlightenment at the time of death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṃ ārādheti, no ce maraṇakāle aññaṃ ārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā antarāparinibbāyī hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters you’re extinguished in between one life and the next … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upahaccaparinibbāyī hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re extinguished upon landing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re extinguished without extra effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re extinguished with extra effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddhaṃsoto hoti akaniṭṭhagāmī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">you head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ bhāvitāya kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatiyā evaṃ bahulīkatāya ime satta phalā sattānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect these seven fruits and benefits.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
