<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>54.01-1. Ekadhammasutta  - 1. One Thing </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">54.01. 1. Ekadhammasutta  - 1. One Thing </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ekadhammavagga  - 1. One Thing </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho … pe … etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ekadhammo, bhikkhave, bhāvito bahulīkato mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when one thing is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ekadhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What one thing? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ānāpānassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfulness of breathing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati kathaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut. They sit down cross-legged, with their body straight, and establish mindfulness right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So satova assasati, satova passasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīghaṃ vā assasanto ‘dīghaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāti, dīghaṃ vā passasanto ‘dīghaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ When breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rassaṃ vā assasanto ‘rassaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāti, rassaṃ vā passasanto ‘rassaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When breathing in lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing in lightly.’ When breathing out lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing out lightly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sabbakāyappaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘sabbakāyappaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the whole body.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the whole body.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling physical processes.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling physical processes.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Pītippaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘pītippaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing rapture.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing rapture.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sukhappaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘sukhappaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing bliss.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘cittasaṅkhārappaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘cittasaṅkhārappaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing mental processes.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing mental processes.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘passambhayaṃ cittasaṅkhāraṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘passambhayaṃ cittasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling mental processes.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling mental processes.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Cittappaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘cittappaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the mind.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘abhippamodayaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘abhippamodayaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in gladdening the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out gladdening the mind.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samādahaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘samādahaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out immersing the mind in samādhi.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in freeing the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out freeing the mind.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aniccānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing impermanence.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing impermanence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Aniccānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘virāgānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘virāgānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing fading away.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing fading away.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nirodhānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘nirodhānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing cessation.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing cessation.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati evaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very fruitful and beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
