<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.36-36. Devasabhāgatasutta  - 36. In Common With the Gods </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.36. 36. Devasabhāgatasutta  - 36. In Common With the Gods </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Puññābhisandavagga  - 4. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgataṃ attamanā devā sabhāgataṃ kathenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when someone has four things the gods are pleased and speak of what they have in common. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā devatā buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatā ito cutā tatrūpapannā tāsaṃ evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are deities with experiential confidence in the Buddha who passed away from here and were reborn there. They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yathārūpena kho mayaṃ buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatā tato cutā idhūpapannā, ariyasāvakopi tathārūpena buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato ehīti devānaṃ santike’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having such experiential confidence in the Buddha, we passed away from there and were reborn here. That noble disciple has the same kind of experiential confidence in the Buddha, so they will come into the presence of the gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā devatā ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgatā ito cutā tatrūpapannā tāsaṃ evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are deities with the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones who passed away from here and were reborn there. They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yathārūpehi kho mayaṃ ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgatā tato cutā idhūpapannā, ariyasāvakopi tathārūpehi ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato ehīti devānaṃ santike’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having such ethical conduct loved by the noble ones, we passed away from there and were reborn here. That noble disciple has the same kind of ethical conduct loved by the noble ones, so they will come into the presence of the gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgataṃ attamanā devā sabhāgataṃ kathentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone has four things the gods are pleased and speak of what they have in common.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
