<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.34-34. Paṭhamadevapadasutta  - 34. Footprints of the Gods (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.34. 34. Paṭhamadevapadasutta  - 34. Footprints of the Gods (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Puññābhisandavagga  - 4. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, devānaṃ devapadāni avisuddhānaṃ sattānaṃ visuddhiyā apariyodātānaṃ sattānaṃ pariyodapanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four footprints of the gods are in order to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ paṭhamaṃ devānaṃ devapadaṃ avisuddhānaṃ sattānaṃ visuddhiyā apariyodātānaṃ sattānaṃ pariyodapanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first footprint of the gods in order to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple’s ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ catutthaṃ devānaṃ devapadaṃ avisuddhānaṃ sattānaṃ visuddhiyā apariyodātānaṃ sattānaṃ pariyodapanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth footprint of the gods in order to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri devānaṃ devapadāni avisuddhānaṃ sattānaṃ visuddhiyā apariyodātānaṃ sattānaṃ pariyodapanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four footprints of the gods are in order to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
