<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.01-1. Cakkavattirājasutta  - 1. A Wheel-Turning Monarch </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.01. 1. Cakkavattirājasutta  - 1. A Wheel-Turning Monarch </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Veḷudvāravagga  - 1. At Bamboo Gate </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā … pe … etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha … said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiñcāpi, bhikkhave, rājā cakkavattī catunnaṃ dīpānaṃ issariyādhipaccaṃ rajjaṃ kāretvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ sahabyataṃ, so tattha nandane vane accharāsaṅghaparivuto dibbehi ca pañcahi kāmaguṇehi samappito samaṅgībhūto paricāreti, so catūhi dhammehi asamannāgato, atha kho so aparimuttova nirayā aparimutto tiracchānayoniyā aparimutto pettivisayā aparimutto apāyaduggativinipātā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose a wheel-turning monarch were to rule as sovereign lord over these four continents. And when his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, in the company of the gods of the Thirty-Three. There he entertains himself in the Garden of Delight, escorted by a band of nymphs, and supplied and provided with the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation. Still, as he’s lacking four things, he’s not exempt from hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. He’s not exempt from places of loss, bad places, the underworld. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñcāpi, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako piṇḍiyālopena yāpeti, nantakāni ca dhāreti, so catūhi dhammehi samannāgato, atha kho so parimutto nirayā parimutto tiracchānayoniyā parimutto pettivisayā parimutto apāyaduggativinipātā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now suppose a noble disciple wears rags and feeds on scraps of alms-food. Still, as they have four things, they’re exempt from hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. They’re exempt from places of loss, bad places, the underworld. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have experiential confidence in the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ujuppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ñāyappaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, sāmīcippaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, yadidaṃ—cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā, esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, straightforward, methodical, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi acchiddehi asabalehi akammāsehi bhujissehi viññuppasatthehi aparāmaṭṭhehi samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple’s ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi catūhi dhammehi samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four factors of stream-entry that they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ dīpānaṃ paṭilābho, yo catunnaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭilābho catunnaṃ dīpānaṃ paṭilābho catunnaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭilābhassa kalaṃ nāgghati soḷasin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And, mendicants, gaining these four continents is not worth a sixteenth part of gaining these four things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
