<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.05-5. Dutiyasāriputtasutta  - 5. With Sāriputta (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.05. 5. Dutiyasāriputtasutta  - 5. With Sāriputta (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Veḷudvāravagga  - 1. At Bamboo Gate </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘sotāpattiyaṅgaṃ, sotāpattiyaṅgan’ti hidaṃ, sāriputta, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sāriputta, they speak of a ‘factor of stream-entry’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho, sāriputta, sotāpattiyaṅgan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is a factor of stream-entry?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sappurisasaṃsevo hi, bhante, sotāpattiyaṅgaṃ, saddhammassavanaṃ sotāpattiyaṅgaṃ, yonisomanasikāro sotāpattiyaṅgaṃ, dhammānudhammappaṭipatti sotāpattiyaṅgan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the factors of stream-entry are associating with good people, listening to the true teaching, proper attention, and practicing in line with the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Sāriputta! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappurisasaṃsevo hi, sāriputta, sotāpattiyaṅgaṃ, saddhammassavanaṃ sotāpattiyaṅgaṃ, yonisomanasikāro sotāpattiyaṅgaṃ, dhammānudhammappaṭipatti sotāpattiyaṅgaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the factors of stream-entry are associating with good people, listening to the true teaching, proper attention, and practicing in line with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Soto, soto’ti hidaṃ, sāriputta, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta, they speak of ‘the stream’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo nu kho, sāriputta, soto”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the stream?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayameva hi, bhante, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo soto, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the stream is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi, sammāsaṅkappo, sammāvācā, sammākammanto, sammāājīvo, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati, sammāsamādhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Sāriputta! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva hi, sāriputta, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo soto, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the stream is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sotāpanno, sotāpanno’ti hidaṃ, sāriputta, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta, they speak of ‘a stream-enterer’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo nu kho, sāriputta, sotāpanno”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is a stream-enterer?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo hi, bhante, iminā ariyena aṭṭhaṅgikena maggena samannāgato ayaṃ vuccati sotāpanno, svāyaṃ āyasmā evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, anyone who possesses this noble eightfold path is called a stream-enterer, the venerable of such and such name and clan.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Sāriputta! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi, sāriputta, iminā ariyena aṭṭhaṅgikena maggena samannāgato ayaṃ vuccati sotāpanno, svāyaṃ āyasmā evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For anyone who possesses this noble eightfold path is called a stream-enterer, the venerable of such and such name and clan.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
