<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.30-30. Nandakalicchavisutta  - 30. With Nandaka the Licchavi </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.30. 30. Nandakalicchavisutta  - 30. With Nandaka the Licchavi </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Saraṇānivagga  - 3. About Sarakāni </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho nandako licchavimahāmatto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho nandakaṃ licchavimahāmattaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Nandaka the Licchavi minister went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi kho, nandaka, dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako sotāpanno hoti avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nandaka, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, nandaka, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, nandaka, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako sotāpanno hoti avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi ca pana, nandaka, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako āyunā saṃyutto hoti dibbenapi mānusenapi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple who has these four things is guaranteed long life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṇṇena saṃyutto hoti dibbenapi mānusenapi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">beauty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhena saṃyutto hoti dibbenapi mānusenapi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">happiness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yasena saṃyutto hoti dibbenapi mānusenapi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">fame, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādhipateyyena saṃyutto hoti dibbenapi mānusenapi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sovereignty, both human and divine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho panāhaṃ, nandaka, nāññassa samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā sutvā vadāmi. Api ca yadeva mayā sāmaṃ ñātaṃ sāmaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sāmaṃ viditaṃ, tadevāhaṃ vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, I don’t say this because I’ve heard it from some other ascetic or brahmin. I only say it because I’ve known, seen, and realized it for myself.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro puriso nandakaṃ licchavimahāmattaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, a certain person said to Nandaka: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nahānakālo, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, it is time to bathe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alaṃ dāni, bhaṇe, etena bāhirena nahānena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Enough now, my man, with that exterior bath. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alamidaṃ ajjhattaṃ nahānaṃ bhavissati, yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">This interior bathing will do for me, that is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavati pasādo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">confidence in the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saraṇānivaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahānāmena dve vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">godhā ca saraṇā duve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duve anāthapiṇḍikā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duve verabhayena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Licchavī dasamo vutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaggo tena pavuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
