<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.41-41. Paṭhamaabhisandasutta  - 41. Overflowing Merit (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.41. 41. Paṭhamaabhisandasutta  - 41. Overflowing Merit (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Sagāthakapuññābhisandavagga  - 5. Overflowing Merit, With Verses </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puññābhisandā, kusalābhisandā, sukhassāhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ paṭhamo puññābhisando, kusalābhisando, sukhassāhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ catuttho puññābhisando, kusalābhisando, sukhassāhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puññābhisandā, kusalābhisandā, sukhassāhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi puññābhisandehi kusalābhisandehi samannāgatassa ariyasāvakassa na sukaraṃ puññassa pamāṇaṃ gaṇetuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and goodness, it’s not easy to measure how much merit they have by saying that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettako puññābhisando, kusalābhisando, sukhassāhāro’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho asaṅkhyeyyo appameyyo mahāpuññakkhandhotveva saṅkhyaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahāsamudde na sukaraṃ udakassa pamāṇaṃ gaṇetuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like trying to measure how much water is in the ocean. It’s not easy to say </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakāni udakāḷhakānī’ti vā ‘ettakāni udakāḷhakasatānī’ti vā ‘ettakāni udakāḷhakasahassānī’ti vā ‘ettakāni udakāḷhakasatasahassānī’ti vāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands, hundreds of thousands of gallons there are. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho asaṅkhyeyyo appameyyo mahāudakakkhandhotveva saṅkhyaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, imehi catūhi puññābhisandehi kusalābhisandehi samannāgatassa ariyasāvakassa na sukaraṃ puññassa pamāṇaṃ gaṇetuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and goodness, it’s not easy to measure how much merit they have by saying that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettako puññābhisando, kusalābhisando, sukhassāhāro’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho asaṅkhyeyyo appameyyo mahāpuññakkhandhotveva saṅkhyaṃ gacchatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mahodadhiṃ aparimitaṃ mahāsaraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Hosts of people use the rivers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahubheravaṃ ratanagaṇānamālayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and though the rivers are many, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Najjo yathā naragaṇasaṅghasevitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">all reach the great deep, the boundless ocean, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puthū savantī upayanti sāgaraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the cruel sea that’s home to precious gems. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ naraṃ annapānavatthadadaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So too, when a person gives food, drink, and clothes; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyāni paccattharaṇassa dāyakaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they’re a giver of beds, seats, and mats—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññassa dhārā upayanti paṇḍitaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the streams of merit reach that astute person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Najjo yathā vārivahāva sāgaran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as the rivers bring their waters to the sea.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
