<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.036-36. Pāṇasutta  - 36. Living Creatures </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.036. 36. Pāṇasutta  - 36. Living Creatures </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sīsapāvanavagga  - 4. In a Rosewood Forest </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso yaṃ imasmiṃ jambudīpe tiṇakaṭṭhasākhāpalāsaṃ tacchetvā ekajjhaṃ saṃhareyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a person was to strip all the grass, sticks, branches, and leaves in India, gather them together into one pile, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekajjhaṃ saṃharitvā sūlaṃ kareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and make them into stakes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sūlaṃ karitvā ye mahāsamudde mahantakā pāṇā te mahantakesu sūlesu āvuneyya, ye mahāsamudde majjhimakā pāṇā te majjhimakesu sūlesu āvuneyya, ye mahāsamudde sukhumakā pāṇā te sukhumakesu sūlesu āvuneyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they’d impale the large creatures in the ocean on large stakes; the medium-sized creatures on medium-sized stakes; and the small creatures on small stakes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apariyādinnā ca, bhikkhave, mahāsamudde oḷārikā pāṇā assu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They wouldn’t run out of sizable creatures in the ocean before </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha imasmiṃ jambudīpe tiṇakaṭṭhasākhāpalāsaṃ parikkhayaṃ pariyādānaṃ gaccheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">using up all the grass, sticks, branches, and leaves in India. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ito bahutarā kho, bhikkhave, mahāsamudde sukhumakā pāṇā, ye na sukarā sūlesu āvunituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are far more small creatures in the ocean than this, so it wouldn’t be feasible to impale them on stakes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhumattā, bhikkhave, attabhāvassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of the small size of those life-forms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mahā kho, bhikkhave, apāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how big the plane of loss is. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mahantasmā kho, bhikkhave, apāyasmā parimutto diṭṭhisampanno puggalo ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person accomplished in view, exempt from that vast plane of loss, truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
