<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.026-26. Mittasutta  - 26. Friends </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.026. 26. Mittasutta  - 26. Friends </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Koṭigāmavagga  - 3. At the Village of Koṭi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca sotabbaṃ maññeyyuṃ—mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā—te vo, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ ariyasaccānaṃ yathābhūtaṃ abhisamayāya samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in the true comprehension of the four noble truths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhassa ariyasaccassa, dukkhasamudayassa ariyasaccassa, dukkhanirodhassa ariyasaccassa, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ariyasaccassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca sotabbaṃ maññeyyuṃ—mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā—te vo, bhikkhave, imesaṃ catunnaṃ ariyasaccānaṃ yathābhūtaṃ abhisamayāya samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in the true comprehension of these four noble truths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
