<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.060-60. Dutiyapabbatūpamasutta  - 60. A Mountain (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.060. 60. Dutiyapabbatūpamasutta  - 60. A Mountain (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Abhisamayavagga  - 6. Comprehension </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, himavā pabbatarājā parikkhayaṃ pariyādānaṃ gaccheyya, ṭhapetvā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose the Himalayas, the king of mountains, was worn away and eroded except for seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ—yaṃ vā himavato pabbatarājassa parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādinnaṃ, yā vā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā avasiṭṭhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is more: the portion of the Himalayas, the king of mountains, that has been worn away and eroded, or the seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds that are left?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ himavato pabbatarājassa yadidaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādinnaṃ; appamattikā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā avasiṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the portion of the Himalayas, the king of mountains, that has been worn away and eroded is certainly more. The seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds are tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhampi na upenti, upanidhampi na upenti, kalabhāgampi na upenti himavato pabbatarājassa parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādinnaṃ upanidhāya satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā avasiṭṭhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the Himalayas, they can’t be reckoned or compared, they’re not even a fraction.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa diṭṭhisampannassa puggalassa abhisametāvino etadeva bahutaraṃ dukkhaṃ yadidaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādinnaṃ; appamattakaṃ avasiṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, for a person with comprehension, a noble disciple accomplished in view, the suffering that’s over and done with is more, what’s left is tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhampi na upeti, upanidhampi na upeti, kalabhāgampi na upeti, purimaṃ dukkhakkhandhaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādinnaṃ upanidhāya yadidaṃ sattakkhattuparamatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the mass of suffering in the past that’s over and done with, it can’t be reckoned or compared, it’s not even a fraction, since there are at most seven more lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a person truly understands about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhisamayavaggo chaṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nakhasikhā pokkharaṇī, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambhejja apare duve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathavī dve samuddā dve, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvemā ca pabbatūpamāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
