<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.013-13. Khandhasutta  - 13. Aggregates </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.013. 13. Khandhasutta  - 13. Aggregates </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dhammacakkappavattanavagga  - 2. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, ariyasaccāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four noble truths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ, dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ, dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the noble truth of suffering? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Pañcupādānakkhandhā’ tissa vacanīyaṃ, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The five grasping aggregates’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpupādānakkhandho … pe … viññāṇupādānakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the noble truth of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ taṇhā ponobbhavikā nandirāgasahagatā tatratatrābhinandinī, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the craving that leads to future rebirth, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure in various different realms. That is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodho cāgo paṭinissaggo mutti anālayo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not adhering to it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri ariyasaccāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four noble truths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
