<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.031-31. Sīsapāvanasutta  - 31. In a Rosewood Forest </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.031. 31. Sīsapāvanasutta  - 31. In a Rosewood Forest </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sīsapāvanavagga  - 4. In a Rosewood Forest </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosambiyaṃ viharati sīsapāvane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī in a rosewood forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā parittāni sīsapāpaṇṇāni pāṇinā gahetvā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha picked up a few rosewood leaves in his hand and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is more: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāni vā mayā parittāni sīsapāpaṇṇāni pāṇinā gahitāni yadidaṃ upari sīsapāvane”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">the few leaves in my hand, or those in the forest above me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appamattakāni, bhante, bhagavatā parittāni sīsapāpaṇṇāni pāṇinā gahitāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the few leaves in your hand are a tiny amount. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho etāneva bahutarāni yadidaṃ upari sīsapāvane”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are far more leaves in the forest above.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, etadeva bahutaraṃ yaṃ vo mayā abhiññāya anakkhātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, there is much more that I have directly known but have not explained to you. What I have explained is a tiny amount. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā cetaṃ, bhikkhave, mayā anakkhātaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why haven’t I explained it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hetaṃ, bhikkhave, atthasaṃhitaṃ nādibrahmacariyakaṃ na nibbidāya na virāgāya na nirodhāya na upasamāya na abhiññāya na sambodhāya na nibbānāya saṃvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because it’s not beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It doesn’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā taṃ mayā anakkhātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I haven’t explained it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, mayā akkhātaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what have I explained? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idaṃ dukkhan’ti, bhikkhave, mayā akkhātaṃ, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti mayā akkhātaṃ, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti mayā akkhātaṃ, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti mayā akkhātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have explained: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā cetaṃ, bhikkhave, mayā akkhātaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why have I explained this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañhi, bhikkhave, atthasaṃhitaṃ etaṃ ādibrahmacariyakaṃ etaṃ nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because it’s beneficial and relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It leads to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā taṃ mayā akkhātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I’ve explained it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
