<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.022-22. Dutiyakoṭigāmasutta  - 22. At the Village of Koṭi (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.022. 22. Dutiyakoṭigāmasutta  - 22. At the Village of Koṭi (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Koṭigāmavagga  - 3. At the Village of Koṭi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me te, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu vā samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu vā brāhmaṇasammatā, na ca pana te āyasmanto sāmaññatthaṃ vā brahmaññatthaṃ vā diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te kho me, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu ceva samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu ca brāhmaṇasammatā, te ca panāyasmanto sāmaññatthañca brahmaññatthañca diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye dukkhaṃ nappajānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are those who don’t understand suffering </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho dukkhassa sambhavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and suffering’s cause, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ca sabbaso dukkhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and where all suffering </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asesaṃ uparujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">ceases with nothing left over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañca maggaṃ na jānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they don’t know the path </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhūpasamagāminaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that leads to the stilling of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetovimuttihīnā te, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They lack the heart’s release, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho paññāvimuttiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as well as the release by wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhabbā te antakiriyāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Unable to make an end, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ve jātijarūpagā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they continue to be reborn and get old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca dukkhaṃ pajānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there are those who understand suffering </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho dukkhassa sambhavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and suffering’s cause, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ca sabbaso dukkhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and where all suffering </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asesaṃ uparujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">ceases with nothing left over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañca maggaṃ pajānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they understand the path </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhūpasamagāminaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that leads to the stilling of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetovimuttisampannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re endowed with the heart’s release, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho paññāvimuttiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as well as the release by wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhabbā te antakiriyāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Able to make an end, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na te jātijarūpagā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t continue to be reborn and get old.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
