<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.096-101-96–101. Chedanādisutta  - 96–101. Mutilation, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.096-101. 96–101. Chedanādisutta  - 96–101. Mutilation, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Catutthaāmakadhaññapeyyālavagga  - 10. Abbreviated Texts on Raw Grain </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… “Evameva kho, bhikkhave, appakā te sattā ye chedanavadhabandhanaviparāmosaālopasahasākārā paṭiviratā; atha kho eteva bahutarā sattā ye chedanavadhabandhanaviparāmosaālopasahasākārā appaṭiviratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“… the sentient beings who refrain from mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence are few, while those who don’t refrain are many. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adiṭṭhattā bhikkhave, catunnaṃ ariyasaccānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because they haven’t seen the four noble truths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhassa ariyasaccassa … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ariyasaccassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaāmakadhaññapeyyālavaggo dasamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettaṃ kāyaṃ dūteyyañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tulākūṭaṃ ukkoṭanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chedanaṃ vadhabandhanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viparālopaṃ sāhasanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
