<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.052-52. Pokkharaṇīsutta  - 52. A Lotus Pond </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.052. 52. Pokkharaṇīsutta  - 52. A Lotus Pond </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Abhisamayavagga  - 6. Comprehension </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, pokkharaṇī paññāsayojanāni āyāmena, paññāsayojanāni vitthārena, paññāsayojanāni ubbedhena, puṇṇā udakassa samatittikā kākapeyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose there was a lotus pond that was fifty leagues long, fifty leagues wide, and fifty leagues deep, full to the brim so a crow could drink from it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato puriso kusaggena udakaṃ uddhareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a person would pick up some water on the tip of a blade of grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ—yaṃ vā kusaggena ubbhataṃ, yaṃ vā pokkharaṇiyā udakan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is more: the water on the tip of the blade of grass, or the water in the lotus pond?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ, yadidaṃ—pokkharaṇiyā udakaṃ; appamattakaṃ kusaggena udakaṃ ubbhataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the water in the lotus pond is certainly more. The water on the tip of a blade of grass is tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhampi na upeti, upanidhampi na upeti, kalabhāgampi na upeti pokkharaṇiyā udakaṃ upanidhāya kusaggena udakaṃ ubbhatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the water in the lotus pond, it can’t be reckoned or compared, it’s not even a fraction.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, for a noble disciple … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
