<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.015-15. Paṭhamadhāraṇasutta  - 15. Remembering (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.015. 15. Paṭhamadhāraṇasutta  - 15. Remembering (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dhammacakkappavattanavagga  - 2. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhāretha no tumhe, bhikkhave, mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, do you remember the four noble truths that I taught?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṃ kho, bhante, dhāremi bhagavatā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I do, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana tvaṃ, bhikkhu, dhāresi mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How so, mendicant?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā paṭhamaṃ ariyasaccaṃ desitaṃ dhāremi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I remember that suffering is the first noble truth you’ve taught; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhasamudayaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā dutiyaṃ ariyasaccaṃ desitaṃ dhāremi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the origin of suffering is the second; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhanirodhaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā tatiyaṃ ariyasaccaṃ desitaṃ dhāremi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the cessation of suffering is the third; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā catutthaṃ ariyasaccaṃ desitaṃ dhāremi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is the fourth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, dhāremi bhagavatā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how I remember the four noble truths as you’ve taught them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, mendicant! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, dhāresi mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good that you remember the four noble truths as I’ve taught them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ kho, bhikkhu, mayā paṭhamaṃ ariyasaccaṃ desitaṃ, tathā naṃ dhārehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suffering is the first noble truth I’ve taught, and that’s how you should remember it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhasamudayaṃ kho, bhikkhu, mayā dutiyaṃ ariyasaccaṃ desitaṃ, tathā naṃ dhārehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The origin of suffering is the second; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhanirodhaṃ kho, bhikkhu, mayā tatiyaṃ ariyasaccaṃ desitaṃ, tathā naṃ dhārehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the cessation of suffering is the third; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā kho, bhikkhu, mayā catutthaṃ ariyasaccaṃ desitaṃ, tathā naṃ dhārehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is the fourth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, dhārehi mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should remember the four noble truths as I’ve taught them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhu, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
