<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.029-29. Pariññeyyasutta  - 29. Should Be Completely Understood </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.029. 29. Pariññeyyasutta  - 29. Should Be Completely Understood </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Koṭigāmavagga  - 3. At the Village of Koṭi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, ariyasaccāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four noble truths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ, dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ, dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri ariyasaccāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four noble truths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ ariyasaccānaṃ atthi ariyasaccaṃ pariññeyyaṃ, atthi ariyasaccaṃ pahātabbaṃ, atthi ariyasaccaṃ sacchikātabbaṃ, atthi ariyasaccaṃ bhāvetabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of these four noble truths, there is one to be completely understood, one to be given up, one to be realized, and one to be developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, ariyasaccaṃ pariññeyyaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And which noble truth should be completely understood? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasaccaṃ pariññeyyaṃ, dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ pahātabbaṃ, dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ sacchikātabbaṃ, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṃ bhāvetabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble truth of suffering should be completely understood. The noble truth of the origin of suffering should be given up. The noble truth of the cessation of suffering should be realized. The noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering should be developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
