<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.011-11. Dhammacakkappavattanasutta  - 11. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.011. 11. Dhammacakkappavattanasutta  - 11. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dhammacakkappavattanavagga  - 2. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bārāṇasiyaṃ viharati isipatane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā pañcavaggiye bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the group of five mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, antā pabbajitena na sevitabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these two extremes should not be cultivated by one who has gone forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo cāyaṃ kāmesu kāmasukhallikānuyogo hīno gammo pothujjaniko anariyo anatthasaṃhito, yo cāyaṃ attakilamathānuyogo dukkho anariyo anatthasaṃhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Indulgence in sensual pleasures, which is low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. And indulgence in self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and pointless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete kho, bhikkhave, ubho ante anupagamma majjhimā paṭipadā tathāgatena abhisambuddhā cakkhukaraṇī ñāṇakaraṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One woke up by understanding the middle way, which gives vision and knowledge, and leads to peace, direct knowledge, awakening, and extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca sā, bhikkhave, majjhimā paṭipadā tathāgatena abhisambuddhā cakkhukaraṇī ñāṇakaraṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is that middle way? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi sammāsaṅkappo sammāvācā sammākammanto sammāājīvo sammāvāyāmo sammāsati sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho sā, bhikkhave, majjhimā paṭipadā tathāgatena abhisambuddhā cakkhukaraṇī ñāṇakaraṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is that middle way, which gives vision and knowledge, and leads to peace, direct knowledge, awakening, and extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho pana, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now this is the noble truth of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātipi dukkhā, jarāpi dukkhā, byādhipi dukkho, maraṇampi dukkhaṃ, appiyehi sampayogo dukkho, piyehi vippayogo dukkho, yampicchaṃ na labhati tampi dukkhaṃ—saṃkhittena pañcupādānakkhandhā dukkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering; illness is suffering; death is suffering; association with the disliked is suffering; separation from the liked is suffering; not getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho pana, bhikkhave, dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now this is the noble truth of the origin of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāyaṃ taṇhā ponobbhavikā nandirāgasahagatā tatratatrābhinandinī, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the craving that leads to future rebirth, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure in various different realms. That is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho pana, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now this is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodho cāgo paṭinissaggo mutti anālayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not adhering to it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho pana, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now this is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idaṃ dukkhaṃ ariyasaccan’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi, ñāṇaṃ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the noble truth of suffering.’ Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kho panidaṃ dukkhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ pariññeyyan’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe … pe … udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This noble truth of suffering should be completely understood.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kho panidaṃ dukkhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ pariññātan’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi, ñāṇaṃ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This noble truth of suffering has been completely understood.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idaṃ dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccan’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi, ñāṇaṃ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the noble truth of the origin of suffering.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kho panidaṃ dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ pahātabban’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe … pe … udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This noble truth of the origin of suffering should be given up.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kho panidaṃ dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ pahīnan’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi, ñāṇaṃ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This noble truth of the origin of suffering has been given up.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idaṃ dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccan’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi, ñāṇaṃ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kho panidaṃ dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ sacchikātabban’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe … pe … udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This noble truth of the cessation of suffering should be realized.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kho panidaṃ dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ sacchikatan’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi, ñāṇaṃ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This noble truth of the cessation of suffering has been realized.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccan’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi, ñāṇaṃ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kho panidaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṃ bhāvetabban’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe … pe … udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering should be developed.’ Such was the vision that arose in me … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kho panidaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṃ bhāvitan’ti me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi, ñāṇaṃ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering has been developed.’ Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca me, bhikkhave, imesu catūsu ariyasaccesu evaṃ tiparivaṭṭaṃ dvādasākāraṃ yathābhūtaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ na suvisuddhaṃ ahosi, neva tāvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya ‘anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho’ti paccaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as my true knowledge and vision about these four noble truths was not fully purified in these three perspectives and twelve respects, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho me, bhikkhave, imesu catūsu ariyasaccesu evaṃ tiparivaṭṭaṃ dvādasākāraṃ yathābhūtaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ suvisuddhaṃ ahosi, athāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya ‘anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho’ti paccaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when my true knowledge and vision about these four noble truths was fully purified in these three perspectives and twelve respects, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñāṇañca pana me dassanaṃ udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge and vision arose in me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘akuppā me vimutti, ayamantimā jāti, natthi dāni punabbhavo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there are no more future lives.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā pañcavaggiyā bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the group of five mendicants was happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imasmiñca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne āyasmato koṇḍaññassa virajaṃ vītamalaṃ dhammacakkhuṃ udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And while this discourse was being spoken, the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in Venerable Koṇḍañña: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yaṃ kiñci samudayadhammaṃ sabbaṃ taṃ nirodhadhamman”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Everything that has a beginning has an end.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavattite ca pana bhagavatā dhammacakke bhummā devā saddamanussāvesuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when the Buddha rolled forth the Wheel of Dhamma, the earth gods raised the cry: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etaṃ bhagavatā bārāṇasiyaṃ isipatane migadāye anuttaraṃ dhammacakkaṃ pavattitaṃ appaṭivattiyaṃ samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Buddha has rolled forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhummānaṃ devānaṃ saddaṃ sutvā cātumahārājikā devā saddamanussāvesuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hearing the cry of the Earth Gods, the Gods of the Four Great Kings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etaṃ bhagavatā bārāṇasiyaṃ isipatane migadāye anuttaraṃ dhammacakkaṃ pavattitaṃ, appaṭivattiyaṃ samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cātumahārājikānaṃ devānaṃ saddaṃ sutvā tāvatiṃsā devā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Gods of the Thirty-Three … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāmā devā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Gods of Yama … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tusitā devā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Joyful Gods … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nimmānaratī devā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Gods Who Love to Create … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paranimmitavasavattī devā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Gods Who Control the Creations of Others … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmakāyikā devā saddamanussāvesuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Gods of Brahmā’s Host raised the cry: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etaṃ bhagavatā bārāṇasiyaṃ isipatane migadāye anuttaraṃ dhammacakkaṃ pavattitaṃ appaṭivattiyaṃ samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Buddha has rolled forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itiha tena khaṇena tena layena tena muhuttena yāva brahmalokā saddo abbhuggacchi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so at that moment, in that instant, the cry soared up to the Brahmā realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayañca dasasahassilokadhātu saṅkampi sampakampi sampavedhi, appamāṇo ca uḷāro obhāso loke pāturahosi atikkamma devānaṃ devānubhāvanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this galaxy shook and rocked and trembled. And an immeasurable, magnificent light appeared in the world, surpassing the glory of the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha was inspired to exclaim: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aññāsi vata bho, koṇḍañño, aññāsi vata bho, koṇḍañño”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Koṇḍañña has really understood! Koṇḍañña has really understood!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti hidaṃ āyasmato koṇḍaññassa “aññāsikoṇḍañño” tveva nāmaṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s how Venerable Koṇḍañña came to be known as “Koṇḍañña Who Understood”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
