<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.021-21. Paṭhamakoṭigāmasutta  - 21. At the Village of Koṭi (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.021. 21. Paṭhamakoṭigāmasutta  - 21. At the Village of Koṭi (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Koṭigāmavagga  - 3. At the Village of Koṭi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vajjīsu viharati koṭigāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at the village of Koṭi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“catunnaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasaccānaṃ ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ sandhāvitaṃ saṃsaritaṃ mamañceva tumhākañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, not understanding and not penetrating four noble truths, both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhassa, bhikkhave, ariyasaccassa ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ sandhāvitaṃ saṃsaritaṃ mamañceva tumhākañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble truths of suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhasamudayassa ariyasaccassa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the origin of suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhanirodhassa ariyasaccassa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the cessation of suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ariyasaccassa ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ sandhāvitaṃ saṃsaritaṃ mamañceva tumhākañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayidaṃ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ anubuddhaṃ paṭividdhaṃ, dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ anubuddhaṃ paṭividdhaṃ, dukkhanirodhaṃ ariyasaccaṃ anubuddhaṃ paṭividdhaṃ, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṃ anubuddhaṃ paṭividdhaṃ; ucchinnā bhavataṇhā, khīṇā bhavanetti; natthi dāni punabbhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These noble truths of suffering, origin, cessation, and the path have been understood and comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the attachment to continued existence is ended; now there are no more future lives.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catunnaṃ ariyasaccānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because of not truly seeing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathābhūtaṃ adassanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the four noble truths, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃsitaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">we have transmigrated for a long time </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāsu tāsveva jātisu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">from one rebirth to the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni etāni diṭṭhāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But now that these truths have been seen, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavanetti samūhatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the attachment to rebirth is eradicated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ucchinnaṃ mūlaṃ dukkhassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The root of suffering is cut off, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi dāni punabbhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">now there are no more future lives.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
