<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.222-222. Diṭṭhisutta  - 222. View </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.222. 222. Diṭṭhisutta  - 222. View </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">23. Duccaritavagga  - 23. Bad Conduct </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo viññūnaṃ; bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a foolish, incompetent bad person has four qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyaduccaritena, vacīduccaritena, manoduccaritena, micchādiṭṭhiyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a foolish, incompetent bad person has these four qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo viññūnaṃ, bahuñca puññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an astute, competent good person has four qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasucaritena, vacīsucaritena, manosucaritena, sammādiṭṭhiyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo viññūnaṃ; bahuñca puññaṃ pasavatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an astute, competent good person has these four qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
