<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.258-258. Kulasutta  - 258. Families </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.258. 258. Kulasutta  - 258. Families </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">26. Abhiññāvagga  - 26. Insight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kānici, bhikkhave, kulāni bhogesu mahattaṃ pattāni na ciraṭṭhitikāni bhavanti, sabbāni tāni catūhi ṭhānehi, etesaṃ vā aññatarena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when families don’t stay wealthy for long, it’s always for one or more of these four reasons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naṭṭhaṃ na gavesanti, jiṇṇaṃ na paṭisaṅkharonti, aparimitapānabhojanā honti, dussīlaṃ itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā ādhipacce ṭhapenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t look for what’s lost; they don’t fix old things; they eat and drink too much; or they put an unethical woman or man in charge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kānici, bhikkhave, kulāni bhogesu mahattaṃ pattāni na ciraṭṭhitikāni bhavanti, sabbāni tāni imehi catūhi ṭhānehi, etesaṃ vā aññatarena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When families don’t stay wealthy for long, it’s always for one or more of these four reasons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kānici, bhikkhave, kulāni bhogesu mahattaṃ pattāni ciraṭṭhitikāni bhavanti, sabbāni tāni catūhi ṭhānehi, etesaṃ vā aññatarena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When families do stay wealthy for long, it’s always for one or more of these four reasons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naṭṭhaṃ gavesanti, jiṇṇaṃ paṭisaṅkharonti, parimitapānabhojanā honti, sīlavantaṃ itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā ādhipacce ṭhapenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They look for what’s lost; they fix old things; they eat and drink in moderation; and they put an ethical woman or man in charge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kānici, bhikkhave, kulāni bhogesu mahattaṃ pattāni ciraṭṭhitikāni bhavanti, sabbāni tāni imehi catūhi ṭhānehi, etesaṃ vā aññatarenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When families do stay wealthy for long, it’s always for one or more of these four reasons.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
