<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.035-35. Vassakārasutta  - 35. With Vassakāra </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.035. 35. Vassakārasutta  - 35. With Vassakāra </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Cakkavagga  - 4. Situations </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vassakāro brāhmaṇo magadhamahāmatto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vassakāra the brahmin, a chief minister of Magadha, went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho vassakāro brāhmaṇo magadhamahāmatto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi kho mayaṃ, bho gotama, dhammehi samannāgataṃ mahāpaññaṃ mahāpurisaṃ paññāpema. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, when someone has four qualities we describe him as a great man with great wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bho gotama, bahussuto hoti tassa tasseva sutajātassa </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are very learned in diverse fields of learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa tasseva kho pana bhāsitassa atthaṃ jānāti: ‘ayaṃ imassa bhāsitassa attho, ayaṃ imassa bhāsitassa attho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand the meaning of diverse statements, saying: ‘This is what that statement means; that is what this statement means.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satimā kho pana hoti cirakatampi cirabhāsitampi saritā anussaritā </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are mindful, able to remember and recollect what was said and done long ago. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāni kho pana tāni gahaṭṭhakāni kiṃkaraṇīyāni, tattha dakkho hoti analaso, tatrupāyāya vīmaṃsāya samannāgato alaṃ kātuṃ alaṃ saṃvidhātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are deft and tireless in household duties, understanding how to go about things in order to complete and organize the work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho mayaṃ, bho gotama, catūhi dhammehi samannāgataṃ mahāpaññaṃ mahāpurisaṃ paññāpema. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone has these four qualities we describe him as a great man with great wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace me, bho gotama, anumoditabbaṃ anumodatu me bhavaṃ gotamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If Master Gotama agrees with me, please say so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace pana me, bho gotama, paṭikkositabbaṃ paṭikkosatu me bhavaṃ gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he disagrees, please say so.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Neva kho tyāhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, anumodāmi na paṭikkosāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, I neither agree nor disagree with you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūhi kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, dhammehi samannāgataṃ mahāpaññaṃ mahāpurisaṃ paññāpemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but when someone has four qualities I describe him as a great man with great wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, brāhmaṇa, bahujanahitāya paṭipanno hoti bahujanasukhāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone practices for the welfare and happiness of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahu’ssa janatā ariye ñāye patiṭṭhāpitā, yadidaṃ kalyāṇadhammatā kusaladhammatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve established many people in the noble method, that is, the principles of goodness and skillfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yaṃ vitakkaṃ ākaṅkhati vitakketuṃ taṃ vitakkaṃ vitakketi, yaṃ vitakkaṃ nākaṅkhati vitakketuṃ na taṃ vitakkaṃ vitakketi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think what they want to think, and don’t think what they don’t want to think. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ saṅkappaṃ ākaṅkhati saṅkappetuṃ taṃ saṅkappaṃ saṅkappeti, yaṃ saṅkappaṃ nākaṅkhati saṅkappetuṃ na taṃ saṅkappaṃ saṅkappeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They consider what they want to consider, and don’t consider what they don’t want to consider. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti cetovasippatto hoti vitakkapathe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thus they have achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva kho tyāhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, anumodāmi na pana paṭikkosāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Brahmin, I neither agree nor disagree with you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, catūhi dhammehi samannāgataṃ mahāpaññaṃ mahāpurisaṃ paññāpemī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but when someone has these four qualities I describe him as a great man with great wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bho gotama, abbhutaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, Master Gotama, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva subhāsitañcidaṃ bhotā gotamena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How well said this was by Master Gotama! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi ca mayaṃ, bho gotama, catūhi dhammehi samannāgataṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ dhārema; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And we will remember Master Gotama as someone who has these four qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavañhi gotamo bahujanahitāya paṭipanno bahujanasukhāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For Master Gotama practices for the welfare and happiness of the people … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahu te janatā ariye ñāye patiṭṭhāpitā, yadidaṃ kalyāṇadhammatā kusaladhammatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavañhi gotamo yaṃ vitakkaṃ ākaṅkhati vitakketuṃ taṃ vitakkaṃ vitakketi, yaṃ vitakkaṃ nākaṅkhati vitakketuṃ na taṃ vitakkaṃ vitakketi, yaṃ saṅkappaṃ ākaṅkhati saṅkappetuṃ taṃ saṅkappaṃ saṅkappeti, yaṃ saṅkappaṃ nākaṅkhati saṅkappetuṃ na taṃ saṅkappaṃ saṅkappeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavañhi gotamo cetovasippatto vitakkapathe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Master Gotama has achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavañhi gotamo catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Master Gotama gets the four absorptions … when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavañhi gotamo āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Master Gotama has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. He lives having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Addhā kho tyāhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, āsajja upanīya vācā bhāsitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your words are clearly invasive and intrusive, brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca tyāhaṃ byākarissāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nevertheless, I will answer you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, bahujanahitāya paṭipanno bahujanasukhāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I do practice for the welfare and happiness of the people … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahu me janatā ariye ñāye patiṭṭhāpitā, yadidaṃ kalyāṇadhammatā kusaladhammatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, yaṃ vitakkaṃ ākaṅkhāmi vitakketuṃ taṃ vitakkaṃ vitakkemi, yaṃ vitakkaṃ nākaṅkhāmi vitakketuṃ na taṃ vitakkaṃ vitakkemi, yaṃ saṅkappaṃ ākaṅkhāmi saṅkappetuṃ taṃ saṅkappaṃ saṅkappemi, yaṃ saṅkappaṃ nākaṅkhāmi saṅkappetuṃ na taṃ saṅkappaṃ saṅkappemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, cetovasippatto vitakkapathe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I do get the four absorptions … when I want, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. I live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo vedi sabbasattānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He discovered release from the snare of death </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maccupāsappamocanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for all beings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hitaṃ devamanussānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and explained the method of the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñāyaṃ dhammaṃ pakāsayi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the welfare of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ ve disvā ca sutvā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they see him or hear him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasīdanti bahū janā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">many people become confident. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maggāmaggassa kusalo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is skilled in the variety of paths, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katakicco anāsavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has completed the task and is free of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho antimasārīro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha, bearing his final body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāpañño mahāpurisoti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called ‘a great man, of great wisdom’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
