<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.041-41. Samādhibhāvanāsutta  - 41. Ways of Developing Immersion Further </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.041. 41. Samādhibhāvanāsutta  - 41. Ways of Developing Immersion Further </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Rohitassavagga  - 5. With Rohitassa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catasso imā, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four ways of developing immersion further. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā catasso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārāya saṃvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā ñāṇadassanappaṭilābhāya saṃvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satisampajaññāya saṃvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in the present life? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the way of developing immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā ñāṇadassanappaṭilābhāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ālokasaññaṃ manasi karoti, divāsaññaṃ adhiṭṭhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant focuses on the perception of light, concentrating on the perception of day, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā divā tathā rattiṃ, yathā rattiṃ tathā divā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">regardless of whether it’s night or day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti vivaṭena cetasā apariyonaddhena sappabhāsaṃ cittaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that’s full of radiance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā ñāṇadassanappaṭilābhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the way of developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satisampajaññāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno viditā vedanā uppajjanti, viditā upaṭṭhahanti, viditā abbhatthaṃ gacchanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant knows feelings as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viditā saññā … pe … viditā vitakkā uppajjanti, viditā upaṭṭhahanti, viditā abbhatthaṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know perceptions as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. They know thoughts as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satisampajaññāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the way of developing immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcasu upādānakkhandhesu udayabbayānupassī viharati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iti rūpaṃ, iti rūpassa samudayo, iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vedanā, iti vedanāya samudayo, iti vedanāya atthaṅgamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is feeling, such is the origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saññā, iti saññāya samudayo, iti saññāya atthaṅgamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is perception, such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saṅkhārā, iti saṅkhārānaṃ samudayo, iti saṅkhārānaṃ atthaṅgamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the ending of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti viññāṇaṃ, iti viññāṇassa samudayo, iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the way of developing immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, catasso samādhibhāvanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ways of developing immersion further. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idañca pana metaṃ, bhikkhave, sandhāya bhāsitaṃ pārāyane puṇṇakapañhe: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And it was in this connection that I said in ‘The Way to the Beyond’, in ‘The Questions of Puṇṇaka’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saṅkhāya lokasmiṃ paroparāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having surveyed the world high and low, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassiñjitaṃ natthi kuhiñci loke; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re not shaken by anything in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santo vidhūmo anīgho nirāso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Peaceful, unclouded, untroubled, with no need for hope, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atāri so jātijaranti brūmī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve crossed over birth and old age, I declare.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
