<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.025-25. Brahmacariyasutta  - 25. The Spiritual Life </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.025. 25. Brahmacariyasutta  - 25. The Spiritual Life </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Uruvelavagga  - 3. At Uruvelā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nayidaṃ, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṃ vussati janakuhanatthaṃ, na janalapanatthaṃ, na lābhasakkārasilokānisaṃsatthaṃ, na itivādappamokkhānisaṃsatthaṃ, na ‘iti maṃ jano jānātū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this spiritual life is not lived for the sake of deceiving people or flattering them, nor for the benefit of possessions, honor, or popularity, nor for the benefit of winning debates, nor thinking, ‘So let people know about me!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho idaṃ, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṃ vussati saṃvaratthaṃ pahānatthaṃ virāgatthaṃ nirodhatthanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This spiritual life is lived for the sake of restraint, giving up, fading away, and cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃvaratthaṃ pahānatthaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha taught the spiritual life </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacariyaṃ anītihaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not because of tradition, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adesayi so bhagavā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">but for the sake of restraint and giving up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbānogadhagāminaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and because it culminates in extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esa maggo mahantehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the path followed by the great souls, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuyāto mahesibhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the great hermits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca taṃ paṭipajjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who practice it </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā buddhena desitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as it was taught by the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhassantaṃ karissanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">doing the teacher’s bidding, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthusāsanakārino”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">make an end of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
