<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.128-128. Dutiyatathāgataacchariyasutta  - 128. Incredible Things About the Realized One (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.128. 128. Dutiyatathāgataacchariyasutta  - 128. Incredible Things About the Realized One (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Bhayavagga  - 13. Fears </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pātubhāvā cattāro acchariyā abbhutā dhammā pātubhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, with the appearance of a Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, four incredible and amazing things appear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ālayārāmā, bhikkhave, pajā ālayaratā ālayasammuditā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">People like attachment, they love it and enjoy it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā tathāgatena anālaye dhamme desiyamāne sussūsati sotaṃ odahati aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet when a Realized One is teaching the Dhamma of non-adherence, they want to listen, they lend an ear, and they apply their minds to understand it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pātubhāvā ayaṃ paṭhamo acchariyo abbhuto dhammo pātubhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mānārāmā, bhikkhave, pajā mānaratā mānasammuditā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">People like conceit, they love it and enjoy it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tathāgatena mānavinaye dhamme desiyamāne sussūsati sotaṃ odahati aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet when a Realized One is teaching the Dhamma of removing conceit, they want to listen, they lend an ear, and they apply their minds to understand it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pātubhāvā ayaṃ dutiyo acchariyo abbhuto dhammo pātubhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasamārāmā, bhikkhave, pajā anupasamaratā anupasamasammuditā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">People like excitement, they love it and enjoy it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tathāgatena opasamike dhamme desiyamāne sussūsati sotaṃ odahati aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet when a Realized One is teaching the Dhamma of peace, they want to listen, they lend an ear, and they apply their minds to understand it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pātubhāvā ayaṃ tatiyo acchariyo abbhuto dhammo pātubhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāgatā, bhikkhave, pajā aṇḍabhūtā pariyonaddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This population is lost in ignorance, trapped in their shells. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tathāgatena avijjāvinaye dhamme desiyamāne sussūsati sotaṃ odahati aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet when a Realized One is teaching the Dhamma of removing ignorance, they want to listen, they lend an ear, and they apply their minds to understand it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pātubhāvā ayaṃ catuttho acchariyo abbhuto dhammo pātubhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pātubhāvā ime cattāro acchariyā abbhutā dhammā pātubhavantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the appearance of a Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, four incredible and amazing things appear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
