<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.131-131. Saṃyojanasutta  - 131. Fetters </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.131. 131. Saṃyojanasutta  - 131. Fetters </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Puggalavagga  - 14. Persons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni honti, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni honti, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person hasn’t given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni honti, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni honti, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person has given up the lower fetters, but not the fetters for getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni honti, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni honti, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person has given up the lower fetters and the fetters for getting reborn, but not the fetters for getting a continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni honti, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni honti, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person has given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting reborn, and the fetters for getting a continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamassa, bhikkhave, puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What person hasn’t given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakadāgāmissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A once-returner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, bhikkhave, puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the person who hasn’t given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamassa, bhikkhave, puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What person has given up the lower fetters, but not the fetters for getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaṃsotassa akaniṭṭhagāmino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One heading upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, bhikkhave, puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamassa, bhikkhave, puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What person has given up the lower fetters and the fetters for getting reborn, but not the fetters for getting a continued existence? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antarāparinibbāyissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One extinguished between one life and the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, bhikkhave, puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni appahīnāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamassa, bhikkhave, puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What person has given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting reborn, and the fetters for getting a continued existence? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arahato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A perfected one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, bhikkhave, puggalassa orambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, upapattipaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni, bhavapaṭilābhiyāni saṃyojanāni pahīnāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
