<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.001-1. Anubuddhasutta  - 1. Understood </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.001. 1. Anubuddhasutta  - 1. Understood </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhaṇḍagāmavagga  - 1. At Bhaṇḍa Village </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vajjīsu viharati bhaṇḍagāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at the village of Bhaṇḍa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catunnaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ sandhāvitaṃ saṃsaritaṃ mamañceva tumhākañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, not understanding and not penetrating four things, both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyassa, bhikkhave, sīlassa ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ sandhāvitaṃ saṃsaritaṃ mamañceva tumhākañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Noble ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyassa, bhikkhave, samādhissa ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ sandhāvitaṃ saṃsaritaṃ mamañceva tumhākañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyāya, bhikkhave, paññāya ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ sandhāvitaṃ saṃsaritaṃ mamañceva tumhākañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wisdom, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyāya, bhikkhave, vimuttiyā ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ sandhāvitaṃ saṃsaritaṃ mamañceva tumhākañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayidaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyaṃ sīlaṃ anubuddhaṃ paṭividdhaṃ, ariyo samādhi anubuddho paṭividdho, ariyā paññā anubuddhā paṭividdhā, ariyā vimutti anubuddhā paṭividdhā, ucchinnā bhavataṇhā, khīṇā bhavanetti, natthi dāni punabbhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom have been understood and comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the attachment to continued existence is ended; now there are no more future lives.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sīlaṃ samādhi paññā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ethics, immersion, and wisdom, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimutti ca anuttarā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the supreme freedom: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anubuddhā ime dhammā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these things have been understood </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gotamena yasassinā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by Gotama the renowned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti buddho abhiññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so the Buddha, having insight, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammamakkhāsi bhikkhunaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">explained this teaching to the mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhassantakaro satthā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The teacher made an end of suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhumā parinibbuto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing clearly, he is extinguished.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
