<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.246-246. Seyyāsutta  - 246. Lying Postures </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.246. 246. Seyyāsutta  - 246. Lying Postures </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">25. Āpattibhayavagga  - 25. Perils of Offenses </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catasso imā, bhikkhave, seyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four ways of lying down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā catasso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Petaseyyā, kāmabhogiseyyā, sīhaseyyā, tathāgataseyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ways a corpse, a pleasure seeker, a lion, and a Realized One lie down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, petaseyyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a corpse lie down? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yebhuyyena, bhikkhave, petā uttānā senti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Corpses usually lie flat on their backs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, petaseyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the way a corpse lies down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, kāmabhogiseyyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a pleasure seeker lie down? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yebhuyyena, bhikkhave, kāmabhogī vāmena passena senti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasure seekers usually lie down on their left side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kāmabhogiseyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the way a pleasure seeker lies down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sīhaseyyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a lion lie down? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīho, bhikkhave, migarājā dakkhiṇena passena seyyaṃ kappeti, pāde pādaṃ accādhāya, antarasatthimhi naṅguṭṭhaṃ anupakkhipitvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The lion, king of beasts, lies down on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other, with his tail tucked between his thighs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So paṭibujjhitvā purimaṃ kāyaṃ abbhunnāmetvā pacchimaṃ kāyaṃ anuviloketi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he wakes, he lifts his front quarters and checks his hind quarters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, bhikkhave, sīho migarājā kiñci passati kāyassa vikkhittaṃ vā visaṭaṃ vā, tena, bhikkhave, sīho migarājā anattamano hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he sees that any part of his body is disordered or displaced, he is displeased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace pana, bhikkhave, sīho migarājā na kiñci passati kāyassa vikkhittaṃ vā visaṭaṃ vā, tena, bhikkhave, sīho migarājā attamano hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he sees that no part of his body is disordered or displaced, he is pleased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sīhaseyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the way a lion lies down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, tathāgataseyyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a Realized One lie down? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, tathāgato vivicceva kāmehi … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a Realized One, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, tathāgataseyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the way a Realized One lies down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, catasso seyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ways of lying down.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
