<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.108-108. Balībaddasutta  - 108. Oxen </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.108. 108. Balībaddasutta  - 108. Oxen </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Valāhakavagga  - 11. Clouds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, balībaddā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of oxen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sagavacaṇḍo no paragavacaṇḍo, paragavacaṇḍo no sagavacaṇḍo, sagavacaṇḍo ca paragavacaṇḍo ca, neva sagavacaṇḍo no paragavacaṇḍo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">~One hostile to its own herd, not others; ~one hostile to other herds, not its own; ~one hostile to both its own herd and others; and ~one hostile to neither its own herd nor others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro balībaddā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of oxen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, cattāro balībaddūpamā puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, these four people similar to oxen are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sagavacaṇḍo no paragavacaṇḍo, paragavacaṇḍo no sagavacaṇḍo, sagavacaṇḍo ca paragavacaṇḍo ca, neva sagavacaṇḍo no paragavacaṇḍo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">~One hostile to their own herd, not others; ~one hostile to other herds, not their own; ~one hostile to both their own herd and others; and ~one hostile to neither their own herd nor others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo sagavacaṇḍo hoti, no paragavacaṇḍo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person hostile to their own herd, not others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sakaparisaṃ ubbejetā hoti, no paraparisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person intimidates their own followers, not the followers of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo sagavacaṇḍo hoti, no paragavacaṇḍo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is hostile to their own herd, not others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, balībaddo sagavacaṇḍo, no paragavacaṇḍo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That person is like an ox that’s hostile to its own herd, not others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo paragavacaṇḍo hoti, no sagavacaṇḍo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person hostile to other herds, not their own? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo paraparisaṃ ubbejetā hoti, no sakaparisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person intimidates the followers of others, not their own. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo paragavacaṇḍo hoti, no sagavacaṇḍo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, balībaddo paragavacaṇḍo, no sagavacaṇḍo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo sagavacaṇḍo ca hoti paragavacaṇḍo ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person hostile to both their own herd and others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sakaparisaṃ ubbejetā hoti paraparisañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person intimidates their own followers and the followers of others. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo sagavacaṇḍo ca hoti paragavacaṇḍo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, balībaddo sagavacaṇḍo ca paragavacaṇḍo ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo neva sagavacaṇḍo hoti no paragavacaṇḍo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person hostile to neither their own herd nor others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo neva sakaparisaṃ ubbejetā hoti, no paraparisañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person doesn’t intimidate their own followers or the followers of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo neva sagavacaṇḍo hoti, no paragavacaṇḍo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, balībaddo neva sagavacaṇḍo, no paragavacaṇḍo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro balībaddūpamā puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four people similar to oxen are found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
