<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.208-208. Dutiyapāpadhammasutta  - 208. Bad Character (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.208. 208. Dutiyapāpadhammasutta  - 208. Bad Character (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Sappurisavagga  - 21. A Good Person </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pāpañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, pāpena pāpatarañca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you who’s bad and who’s worse, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇañca, kalyāṇena kalyāṇatarañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s good and who’s better. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pāpo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who’s bad? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco micchādiṭṭhiko hoti … pe … micchāñāṇī hoti, micchāvimutti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called bad. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pāpena pāpataro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who’s worse? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco attanā ca micchādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca micchādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti … pe … attanā ca micchāñāṇī hoti, parañca micchāñāṇe samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. And they encourage others in these same qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca micchāvimutti hoti, parañca micchāvimuttiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpena pāpataro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called worse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kalyāṇo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who’s good? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sammādiṭṭhiko hoti … pe … sammāñāṇī hoti, sammāvimutti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kalyāṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kalyāṇena kalyāṇataro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who’s better? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco attanā ca sammādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca sammādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti … pe … attanā ca sammāñāṇī hoti, parañca sammāñāṇe samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. And they encourage others in these same qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca sammāvimutti hoti, parañca sammāvimuttiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kalyāṇena kalyāṇataro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called better.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
