<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.057-57. Suppavāsāsutta  - 57. Suppavāsā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.057. 57. Suppavāsāsutta  - 57. Suppavāsā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Puññābhisandavagga  - 6. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā koliyesu viharati pajjanikaṃ nāma koliyānaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Koliyans, where they have a town named Pajjanika. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena suppavāsāya koliyadhītuyā nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of Suppavāsā the Koliyan, where he sat on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho suppavāsā koliyadhītā bhagavantaṃ paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappesi sampavāresi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Suppavāsā served and satisfied the Buddha with her own hands with a variety of delicious foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho suppavāsā koliyadhītā bhagavantaṃ bhuttāviṃ onītapattapāṇiṃ ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, she sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho suppavāsaṃ koliyadhītaraṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said to her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhojanaṃ, suppavāse, dentī ariyasāvikā paṭiggāhakānaṃ cattāri ṭhānāni deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suppavāsā, when a noble disciple gives food, she gives the recipients four things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyuṃ deti, vaṇṇaṃ deti, sukhaṃ deti, balaṃ deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Long life, beauty, happiness, and strength. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyuṃ kho pana datvā āyussa bhāginī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving long life, she has long life as a god or human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaṇṇaṃ datvā vaṇṇassa bhāginī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving beauty, she has beauty as a god or human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhaṃ datvā sukhassa bhāginī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving happiness, she has happiness as a god or human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Balaṃ datvā balassa bhāginī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving strength, she has strength as a god or human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanaṃ, suppavāse, dentī ariyasāvikā paṭiggāhakānaṃ imāni cattāri ṭhānāni detīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple gives food, she gives the recipients these four things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susaṅkhataṃ bhojanaṃ yā dadāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When she gives well-prepared food, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suciṃ paṇītaṃ rasasā upetaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">pure, fine, and full of flavor, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā dakkhiṇā ujjugatesu dinnā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that offering—given to people of integrity, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caraṇūpapannesu mahaggatesu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who have good conduct, and are big-hearted—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññena puññaṃ saṃsandamānā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">joins merit to merit. It’s very fruitful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahapphalā lokavidūna vaṇṇitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and is praised by those who know the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etādisaṃ yaññamanussarantā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who recall such sacrifices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye vedajātā vicaranti loke; </span></p>
<p class="p3">live in the world full of joy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vineyya maccheramalaṃ samūlaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve driven out the stain of stinginess down to the root, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aninditā saggamupenti ṭhānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">blameless, they go to a heavenly place.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
