<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.255-255. Pariyesanāsutta  - 255. Searches </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.255. 255. Pariyesanāsutta  - 255. Searches </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">26. Abhiññāvagga  - 26. Insight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catasso imā, bhikkhave, anariyapariyesanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four ignoble searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā catasso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco attanā jarādhammo samāno jarādhammaṃyeva pariyesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone liable to grow old searches only for what grows old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā byādhidhammo samāno byādhidhammaṃyeva pariyesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone liable to sickness searches only for what gets sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā maraṇadhammo samāno maraṇadhammaṃyeva pariyesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone liable to death searches only for what dies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā saṅkilesadhammo samāno saṅkilesadhammaṃyeva pariyesati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone whose nature is defiled searches only for what is defiled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, catasso anariyapariyesanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ignoble searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catasso imā, bhikkhave, ariyapariyesanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these four noble searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā catasso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco attanā jarādhammo samāno jarādhamme ādīnavaṃ viditvā ajaraṃ anuttaraṃ yogakkhemaṃ nibbānaṃ pariyesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who is liable to grow old, knowing the drawback in what grows old, searches for the unaging supreme sanctuary, extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā byādhidhammo samāno byādhidhamme ādīnavaṃ viditvā abyādhiṃ anuttaraṃ yogakkhemaṃ nibbānaṃ pariyesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who is liable to get sick, knowing the drawback in what gets sick, searches for the sickness-free supreme sanctuary, extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā maraṇadhammo samāno maraṇadhamme ādīnavaṃ viditvā amataṃ anuttaraṃ yogakkhemaṃ nibbānaṃ pariyesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who is liable to die, knowing the drawback in what dies, searches for the deathless supreme sanctuary, extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā saṅkilesadhammo samāno saṅkilesadhamme ādīnavaṃ viditvā asaṅkiliṭṭhaṃ anuttaraṃ yogakkhemaṃ nibbānaṃ pariyesati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone whose nature is defiled, knowing the drawback in what is defiled, searches for the undefiled supreme sanctuary, extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, catasso ariyapariyesanā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four noble searches.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
