<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.138-138. Nikaṭṭhasutta  - 138. Retreat </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.138. 138. Nikaṭṭhasutta  - 138. Retreat </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Puggalavagga  - 14. Persons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikaṭṭhakāyo anikaṭṭhacitto, anikaṭṭhakāyo nikaṭṭhacitto, anikaṭṭhakāyo ca anikaṭṭhacitto ca, nikaṭṭhakāyo ca nikaṭṭhacitto ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">~One is on retreat in body, but not mind; ~one is on retreat in mind, but not body; ~one is on retreat in neither body nor mind; and ~one is on retreat in both body and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo nikaṭṭhakāyo hoti anikaṭṭhacitto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person on retreat in body, but not mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person frequents remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha kāmavitakkampi vitakketi byāpādavitakkampi vitakketi vihiṃsāvitakkampi vitakketi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they think sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo nikaṭṭhakāyo hoti anikaṭṭhacitto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is on retreat in body, but not mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo anikaṭṭhakāyo hoti nikaṭṭhacitto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person on retreat in mind, but not body? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo naheva kho araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person doesn’t frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha nekkhammavitakkampi vitakketi abyāpādavitakkampi vitakketi avihiṃsāvitakkampi vitakketi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they think thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo anikaṭṭhakāyo hoti nikaṭṭhacitto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is on retreat in mind, but not body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo anikaṭṭhakāyo ca hoti anikaṭṭhacitto ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person on retreat in neither body nor mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo naheva kho araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person doesn’t frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha kāmavitakkampi vitakketi byāpādavitakkampi vitakketi vihiṃsāvitakkampi vitakketi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they think sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo anikaṭṭhakāyo ca hoti anikaṭṭhacitto ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is on retreat in neither body nor mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo nikaṭṭhakāyo ca hoti nikaṭṭhacitto ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person on retreat in both body and mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person frequents remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha nekkhammavitakkampi vitakketi abyāpādavitakkampi vitakketi avihiṃsāvitakkampi vitakketi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they think thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo nikaṭṭhakāyo ca hoti nikaṭṭhacitto ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is on retreat in both body and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
