<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.029-29. Dhammapadasutta  - 29. Basic Principles </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.029. 29. Dhammapadasutta  - 29. Basic Principles </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Uruvelavagga  - 3. At Uruvelā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, dhammapadāni aggaññāni rattaññāni vaṃsaññāni porāṇāni asaṅkiṇṇāni asaṅkiṇṇapubbāni, na saṅkīyanti na saṅkīyissanti, appaṭikuṭṭhāni samaṇehi brāhmaṇehi viññūhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four basic principles are original, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anabhijjhā, bhikkhave, dhammapadaṃ aggaññaṃ rattaññaṃ vaṃsaññaṃ porāṇaṃ asaṅkiṇṇaṃ asaṅkiṇṇapubbaṃ, na saṅkīyati na saṅkīyissati, appaṭikuṭṭhaṃ samaṇehi brāhmaṇehi viññūhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contentment, good will, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abyāpādo, bhikkhave, dhammapadaṃ aggaññaṃ rattaññaṃ vaṃsaññaṃ porāṇaṃ asaṅkiṇṇaṃ asaṅkiṇṇapubbaṃ, na saṅkīyati na saṅkīyissati, appaṭikuṭṭhaṃ samaṇehi brāhmaṇehi viññūhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsati, bhikkhave, dhammapadaṃ aggaññaṃ rattaññaṃ vaṃsaññaṃ porāṇaṃ asaṅkiṇṇaṃ asaṅkiṇṇapubbaṃ, na saṅkīyati na saṅkīyissati, appaṭikuṭṭhaṃ samaṇehi brāhmaṇehi viññūhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsamādhi, bhikkhave, dhammapadaṃ aggaññaṃ rattaññaṃ vaṃsaññaṃ porāṇaṃ asaṅkiṇṇaṃ asaṅkiṇṇapubbaṃ, na saṅkīyati na saṅkīyissati, appaṭikuṭṭhaṃ samaṇehi brāhmaṇehi viññūhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri dhammapadāni aggaññāni rattaññāni vaṃsaññāni porāṇāni asaṅkiṇṇāni asaṅkiṇṇapubbāni, na saṅkīyanti na saṅkīyissanti, appaṭikuṭṭhāni samaṇehi brāhmaṇehi viññūhīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four basic principles are original, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anabhijjhālu vihareyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should live with contentment, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abyāpannena cetasā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a heart of good will, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sato ekaggacittassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">mindful, with unified mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattaṃ susamāhito”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">serene within.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
