<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.197-197. Mallikādevīsutta  - 197. Queen Mallikā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.197. 197. Mallikādevīsutta  - 197. Queen Mallikā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Mahāvagga  - 20. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mallikā devī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho mallikā devī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Queen Mallikā went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena midhekacco mātugāmo dubbaṇṇā ca hoti durūpā supāpikā dassanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why in this life some females are ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daliddā ca hoti appassakā appabhogā appesakkhā ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">and poor, with few assets and possessions; and insignificant? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena midhekacco mātugāmo dubbaṇṇā ca hoti durūpā supāpikā dassanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why are some females ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍhā ca hoti mahaddhanā mahābhogā mahesakkhā ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">but rich, affluent, wealthy, and illustrious? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena midhekacco mātugāmo abhirūpā ca hoti dassanīyā pāsādikā paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why are some females attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daliddā ca hoti appassakā appabhogā appesakkhā ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">but poor, with few assets and possessions; and insignificant? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena midhekacco mātugāmo abhirūpā ca hoti dassanīyā pāsādikā paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgatā, aḍḍhā ca hoti mahaddhanā mahābhogā mahesakkhā cā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why are some females attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty; and rich, affluent, wealthy, and illustrious?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, mallike, ekacco mātugāmo kodhanā hoti upāyāsabahulā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Take a female who is irritable and bad-tempered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appampi vuttā samānā abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati, kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even when criticized a little bit she loses her temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na dātā hoti samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā annaṃ pānaṃ vatthaṃ yānaṃ mālāgandhavilepanaṃ seyyāvasathapadīpeyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She doesn’t give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Issāmanikā kho pana hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s jealous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paralābhasakkāragarukāramānanavandanapūjanāsu issati upadussati issaṃ bandhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">envying, resenting, and begrudging the possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and veneration given to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce tato cutā itthattaṃ āgacchati, sā yattha yattha paccājāyati dubbaṇṇā ca hoti durūpā supāpikā dassanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If she comes back to this state of existence after passing away, wherever she is reborn she’s ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daliddā ca hoti appassakā appabhogā appesakkhā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and poor, with few assets and possessions; and insignificant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, mallike, ekacco mātugāmo kodhanā hoti upāyāsabahulā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another female who is irritable and bad-tempered. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appampi vuttā samānā abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati, kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā dātā hoti samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā annaṃ pānaṃ vatthaṃ yānaṃ mālāgandhavilepanaṃ seyyāvasathapadīpeyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But she does give to ascetics or brahmins … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissāmanikā kho pana hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s not jealous … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paralābhasakkāragarukāramānanavandanapūjanāsu na issati na upadussati na issaṃ bandhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce tato cutā itthattaṃ āgacchati, sā yattha yattha paccājāyati dubbaṇṇā ca hoti durūpā supāpikā dassanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If she comes back to this state of existence after passing away, wherever she is reborn she’s ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍhā ca hoti mahaddhanā mahābhogā mahesakkhā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but rich, affluent, wealthy, and illustrious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, mallike, ekacco mātugāmo akkodhanā hoti anupāyāsabahulā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another female who isn’t irritable and bad-tempered. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahumpi vuttā samānā nābhisajjati na kuppati na byāpajjati na patitthīyati, na kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā na dātā hoti samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā annaṃ pānaṃ vatthaṃ yānaṃ mālāgandhavilepanaṃ seyyāvasathapadīpeyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But she doesn’t give to ascetics or brahmins … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Issāmanikā kho pana hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s jealous … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paralābhasakkāragarukāramānanavandanapūjanāsu issati upadussati issaṃ bandhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce tato cutā itthattaṃ āgacchati, sā yattha yattha paccājāyati abhirūpā ca hoti dassanīyā pāsādikā paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If she comes back to this state of existence after passing away, wherever she is reborn she’s attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daliddā ca hoti appassakā appabhogā appesakkhā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but poor, with few assets and possessions; and insignificant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, mallike, ekacco mātugāmo akkodhanā hoti anupāyāsabahulā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another female who isn’t irritable and bad-tempered. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahumpi vuttā samānā nābhisajjati na kuppati na byāpajjati na patitthīyati, na kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā dātā hoti samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā annaṃ pānaṃ vatthaṃ yānaṃ mālāgandhavilepanaṃ seyyāvasathapadīpeyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She gives to ascetics and brahmins … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissāmanikā kho pana hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s not jealous … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paralābhasakkāragarukāramānanavandanapūjanāsu na issati na upadussati na issaṃ bandhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ce tato cutā itthattaṃ āgacchati, sā yattha yattha paccājāyati abhirūpā ca hoti dassanīyā pāsādikā paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If she comes back to this state of existence after passing away, wherever she is reborn she’s attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍhā ca hoti mahaddhanā mahābhogā mahesakkhā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and rich, affluent, wealthy, and illustrious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, mallike, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekacco mātugāmo dubbaṇṇā ca hoti durūpā supāpikā dassanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is why are some females are ugly … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daliddā ca hoti appassakā appabhogā appesakkhā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and poor … and insignificant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ pana, mallike, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekacco mātugāmo dubbaṇṇā ca hoti durūpā supāpikā dassanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And some females are ugly … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍhā ca hoti mahaddhanā mahābhogā mahesakkhā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but rich … and illustrious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, mallike, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekacco mātugāmo abhirūpā ca hoti dassanīyā pāsādikā paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And some females are attractive … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daliddā ca hoti appassakā appabhogā appesakkhā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but poor … and insignificant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ pana, mallike, hetu ayaṃ paccayo, yena midhekacco mātugāmo abhirūpā ca hoti dassanīyā pāsādikā paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And some females are attractive … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍhā ca hoti mahaddhanā mahābhogā mahesakkhā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and rich … and illustrious.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, mallikā devī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, Queen Mallikā said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yā nūnāhaṃ, bhante, aññaṃ jātiṃ kodhanā ahosiṃ upāyāsabahulā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, in another life I must have been irritable and bad-tempered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appampi vuttā samānā abhisajjiṃ kuppiṃ byāpajjiṃ patitthīyiṃ kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātvākāsiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even when lightly criticized I must have lost my temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāhaṃ, bhante, etarahi dubbaṇṇā durūpā supāpikā dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For now I am ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā nūnāhaṃ, bhante, aññaṃ jātiṃ dātā ahosiṃ samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā annaṃ pānaṃ vatthaṃ yānaṃ mālāgandhavilepanaṃ seyyāvasathapadīpeyyaṃ, sāhaṃ, bhante, etarahi aḍḍhā mahaddhanā mahābhogā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In another life I must have given to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. For now I am rich, affluent, and wealthy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā nūnāhaṃ, bhante, aññaṃ jātiṃ anissāmanikā ahosiṃ, paralābhasakkāragarukāramānanavandanapūjanāsu na issiṃ na upadussiṃ na issaṃ bandhiṃ, sāhaṃ, bhante, etarahi mahesakkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In another life, I must not have been jealous, envying, resenting, and begrudging the possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and veneration given to others. For now I am illustrious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi kho pana, bhante, imasmiṃ rājakule khattiyakaññāpi brāhmaṇakaññāpi gahapatikaññāpi, tāsāhaṃ issarādhipaccaṃ kāremi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this royal court I command maidens of the aristocrats, brahmins, and householders. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ, bhante, ajjatagge akkodhanā bhavissāmi anupāyāsabahulā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, sir, from this day forth I will not be irritable and bad-tempered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahumpi vuttā samānā nābhisajjissāmi na kuppissāmi na byāpajjissāmi na patitthīyissāmi, kopañca dosañca appaccayañca na pātukarissāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even when heavily criticized I won’t lose my temper, become annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dassāmi samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā annaṃ pānaṃ vatthaṃ yānaṃ mālāgandhavilepanaṃ seyyāvasathapadīpeyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissāmanikā bhavissāmi, paralābhasakkāragarukāramānanavandanapūjanāsu na ississāmi na upadussissāmi na issaṃ bandhissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will not be jealous, envying, resenting, and begrudging the possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and veneration given to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkantaṃ, bhante … pe … upāsikaṃ maṃ, bhante, bhagavā dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, sir! … From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
