<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.187-187. Vassakārasutta  - 187. With Vassakāra </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.187. 187. Vassakārasutta  - 187. With Vassakāra </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 19. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vassakāro brāhmaṇo magadhamahāmatto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vassakāra the brahmin, a chief minister of Magadha, went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho vassakāro brāhmaṇo magadhamahāmatto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jāneyya nu kho, bho gotama, asappuriso asappurisaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, could a bad person know of a bad person: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This fellow is a bad person’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānaṃ kho etaṃ, brāhmaṇa, anavakāso yaṃ asappuriso asappurisaṃ jāneyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s impossible, brahmin, it can’t happen.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jāneyya pana, bho gotama, asappuriso sappurisaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Could a bad person know of a good person: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This fellow is a good person’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etampi kho, brāhmaṇa, aṭṭhānaṃ anavakāso yaṃ asappuriso sappurisaṃ jāneyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That too is impossible, it can’t happen.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jāneyya nu kho, bho gotama, sappuriso sappurisaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, could a good person know of a good person: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This fellow is a good person’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ṭhānaṃ kho etaṃ, brāhmaṇa, vijjati yaṃ sappuriso sappurisaṃ jāneyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That, brahmin, is possible.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jāneyya pana, bho gotama, sappuriso asappurisaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Could a good person know of a bad person: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This fellow is a bad person’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etampi kho, brāhmaṇa, ṭhānaṃ vijjati yaṃ sappuriso asappurisaṃ jāneyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That too is possible.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bho gotama, abbhutaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, Master Gotama, it’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva subhāsitañcidaṃ bhotā gotamena: </span></p>
<p class="p3">how well said this was by Master Gotama: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aṭṭhānaṃ kho etaṃ, brāhmaṇa, anavakāso yaṃ asappuriso asappurisaṃ jāneyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s impossible, it can’t happen, that a bad person could know … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etampi kho, brāhmaṇa, aṭṭhānaṃ anavakāso yaṃ asappuriso sappurisaṃ jāneyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānaṃ kho etaṃ, brāhmaṇa, vijjati yaṃ sappuriso sappurisaṃ jāneyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible that a good person could know …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etampi kho, brāhmaṇa, ṭhānaṃ vijjati yaṃ sappuriso asappurisaṃ jāneyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamidaṃ, bho gotama, samayaṃ todeyyassa brāhmaṇassa parisati parūpārambhaṃ vattenti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once, members of the brahmin Todeyya’s assembly were going on complaining about others: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bālo ayaṃ rājā eḷeyyo samaṇe rāmaputte abhippasanno, samaṇe ca pana rāmaputte evarūpaṃ paramanipaccakāraṃ karoti, yadidaṃ abhivādanaṃ paccuṭṭhānaṃ añjalikammaṃ sāmīcikammanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This King Eḷeyya is a fool to be so devoted to Rāmaputta. He even shows him the utmost deference by bowing down to him, rising up for him, greeting him with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette for him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imepi rañño eḷeyyassa parihārakā bālā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And these king’s men are fools too—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yamako moggallo uggo nāvindakī gandhabbo aggivesso, ye samaṇe rāmaputte abhippasannā, samaṇe ca pana rāmaputte evarūpaṃ paramanipaccakāraṃ karonti, yadidaṃ abhivādanaṃ paccuṭṭhānaṃ añjalikammaṃ sāmīcikamman’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yamaka, Moggalla, Ugga, Nāvindakī, Gandhabba, and Aggivessa—for they show the same kind of deference to Rāmaputta.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tyāssudaṃ todeyyo brāhmaṇo iminā nayena neti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Todeyya reasoned with them like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kiṃ maññanti, bhonto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What do you think, sirs? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇḍito rājā eḷeyyo karaṇīyādhikaraṇīyesu vacanīyādhivacanīyesu alamatthadasatarehi alamatthadasataro’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the various duties and speeches, isn’t King Eḷeyya astute, even better than the experts?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃ, bho, paṇḍito rājā eḷeyyo karaṇīyādhikaraṇīyesu vacanīyādhivacanīyesu alamatthadasatarehi alamatthadasataroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That’s true, sir.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bho, samaṇo rāmaputto raññā eḷeyyena paṇḍitena paṇḍitataro karaṇīyādhikaraṇīyesu vacanīyādhivacanīyesu alamatthadasatarena alamatthadasataro, tasmā rājā eḷeyyo samaṇe rāmaputte abhippasanno, samaṇe ca pana rāmaputte evarūpaṃ paramanipaccakāraṃ karoti, yadidaṃ abhivādanaṃ paccuṭṭhānaṃ añjalikammaṃ sāmīcikammaṃ’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s because Rāmaputta is even more astute and expert than King Eḷeyya that the king is so devoted to him. That’s why he even shows Rāmaputta the utmost deference by bowing down to him, rising up for him, greeting him with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette for him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ kiṃ maññanti, bhonto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, sirs? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇḍitā rañño eḷeyyassa parihārakā—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yamako moggallo uggo nāvindakī gandhabbo aggivesso, karaṇīyādhikaraṇīyesu vacanīyādhivacanīyesu alamatthadasatarehi alamatthadasatarā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the various duties and speeches, aren’t the king’s men—Yamaka, Moggalla, Ugga, Nāvindakī, Gandhabba, and Aggivessa—astute, even better than the experts?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃ, bho, paṇḍitā rañño eḷeyyassa parihārakā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That’s true, sir.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yamako moggallo uggo nāvindakī gandhabbo aggivesso, karaṇīyādhikaraṇīyesu vacanīyādhivacanīyesu alamatthadasatarehi alamatthadasatarāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bho, samaṇo rāmaputto rañño eḷeyyassa parihārakehi paṇḍitehi paṇḍitataro karaṇīyādhikaraṇīyesu vacanīyādhivacanīyesu alamatthadasatarehi alamatthadasataro, tasmā rañño eḷeyyassa parihārakā samaṇe rāmaputte abhippasannā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s because Rāmaputta is even more astute and expert than the king’s men that they have such devotion to him. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇe ca pana rāmaputte evarūpaṃ paramanipaccakāraṃ karonti, yadidaṃ abhivādanaṃ paccuṭṭhānaṃ añjalikammaṃ sāmīcikamman’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because Rāmaputta is even more astute and expert than King Eḷeyya that the king is so devoted to him. That’s why he even shows Rāmaputta the utmost deference by bowing down to him, rising up for him, greeting him with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette for him.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchariyaṃ, bho gotama, abbhutaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s incredible, Master Gotama, it’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva subhāsitañcidaṃ bhotā gotamena: </span></p>
<p class="p3">how well said this was by Master Gotama: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aṭṭhānaṃ kho etaṃ, brāhmaṇa, anavakāso yaṃ asappuriso asappurisaṃ jāneyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s impossible, it can’t happen, that a bad person could know … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etampi kho, brāhmaṇa, aṭṭhānaṃ anavakāso yaṃ asappuriso sappurisaṃ jāneyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānaṃ kho etaṃ, brāhmaṇa, vijjati yaṃ sappuriso sappurisaṃ jāneyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible that a good person could know … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etampi kho, brāhmaṇa, ṭhānaṃ vijjati yaṃ sappuriso asappurisaṃ jāneyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asappuriso ayaṃ bhavan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handa ca dāni mayaṃ, bho gotama, gacchāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well, now, Master Gotama, I must go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahukiccā mayaṃ bahukaraṇīyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have many duties, and much to do.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassadāni tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, kālaṃ maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, brahmin, go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vassakāro brāhmaṇo magadhamahāmatto bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vassakāra the brahmin, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, got up from his seat and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
