<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.177-177. Rāhulasutta  - 177. With Rāhula </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.177. 177. Rāhulasutta  - 177. With Rāhula </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Sañcetaniyavagga  - 18. Intention </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā rāhulo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ rāhulaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Rāhula went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā ca, rāhula, ajjhattikā pathavīdhātu yā ca bāhirā pathavīdhātu, pathavīdhāturevesā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rāhula, the interior earth element and the exterior earth element are just the earth element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti, evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā pathavīdhātuyā nibbindati, pathavīdhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly see with right understanding, you reject the earth element, detaching the mind from the earth element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā ca, rāhula, ajjhattikā āpodhātu yā ca bāhirā āpodhātu, āpodhāturevesā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The interior water element and the exterior water element are just the water element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti, evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā āpodhātuyā nibbindati, āpodhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly see with right understanding, you reject the water element, detaching the mind from the water element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā ca, rāhula, ajjhattikā tejodhātu yā ca bāhirā tejodhātu, tejodhāturevesā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The interior fire element and the exterior fire element are just the fire element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti, evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā tejodhātuyā nibbindati, tejodhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly see with right understanding, you reject the fire element, detaching the mind from the fire element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā ca, rāhula, ajjhattikā vāyodhātu yā ca bāhirā vāyodhātu, vāyodhāturevesā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The interior air element and the exterior air element are just the air element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti, evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā vāyodhātuyā nibbindati, vāyodhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly see with right understanding, you reject the air element, detaching the mind from the air element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, rāhula, bhikkhu imāsu catūsu dhātūsu nevattānaṃ na attaniyaṃ samanupassati, ayaṃ vuccati, rāhula, bhikkhu acchecchi taṇhaṃ, vivattayi saṃyojanaṃ, sammā mānābhisamayā antamakāsi dukkhassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant sees these four elements as neither self nor belonging to self, they’re called a mendicant who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
