<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.076-76. Kusinārasutta  - 76. At Kusinārā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.076. 76. Kusinārasutta  - 76. At Kusinārā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Apaṇṇakavagga  - 8. Guaranteed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kusinārāyaṃ viharati upavattane mallānaṃ sālavane antarena yamakasālānaṃ parinibbānasamaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying between a pair of <i>sal</i> trees in the <i>sal</i> forest of the Mallas at Upavattana near Kusinārā at the time of his final extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, ekabhikkhussapi kaṅkhā vā vimati vā buddhe vā dhamme vā saṃghe vā magge vā paṭipadāya vā, pucchatha, bhikkhave, mā pacchā vippaṭisārino ahuvattha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Perhaps even a single mendicant has doubt or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the practice. So ask, mendicants! Don’t regret it later, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammukhībhūto no satthā ahosi, nāsakkhimha bhagavantaṃ sammukhā paṭipucchitun’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We were in the Teacher’s presence and we weren’t able to ask the Buddha a question.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, the mendicants kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time the Buddha addressed the mendicants: … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, ekabhikkhussapi kaṅkhā vā vimati vā buddhe vā dhamme vā saṅghe vā magge vā paṭipadāya vā, pucchatha, bhikkhave, mā pacchā vippaṭisārino ahuvattha: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammukhībhūto no satthā ahosi, nāsakkhimha bhagavantaṃ sammukhā paṭipucchitun’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time, the mendicants kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a third time the Buddha addressed the mendicants: … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, ekabhikkhussapi kaṅkhā vā vimati vā buddhe vā dhamme vā saṅghe vā magge vā paṭipadāya vā, pucchatha, bhikkhave, mā pacchā vippaṭisārino ahuvattha: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammukhībhūto no satthā ahosi, nāsakkhimha bhagavantaṃ sammukhā paṭipucchitun’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a third time, the mendicants kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, satthugāravenapi na puccheyyātha, sahāyakopi, bhikkhave, sahāyakassa ārocetū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, perhaps you don’t ask out of respect for the Teacher. So let a friend tell a friend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, the mendicants kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ pasanno ahaṃ, bhante. Natthi imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe ekabhikkhussapi kaṅkhā vā vimati vā buddhe vā dhamme vā saṅghe vā magge vā paṭipadāya vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am quite confident that there’s not even a single mendicant in this Saṅgha who has doubt or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the practice.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pasādā kho tvaṃ, ānanda, vadesi. Ñāṇameva hettha, ānanda, tathāgatassa: ‘natthi imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe ekabhikkhussapi kaṅkhā vā vimati vā buddhe vā dhamme vā saṅghe vā magge vā paṭipadāya vā’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, you speak from faith. But the Realized One knows that there’s not even a single mendicant in this Saṅgha who has doubt or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesañhi, ānanda, pañcannaṃ bhikkhusatānaṃ yo pacchimako bhikkhu so sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even the last of these five hundred mendicants is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
