<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.016-16. Sokhummasutta  - 16. Subtlety </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.016. 16. Sokhummasutta  - 16. Subtlety </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Caravagga  - 2. Walking </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, sokhummāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of subtlety. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu rūpasokhummena samannāgato hoti paramena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena ca rūpasokhummena aññaṃ rūpasokhummaṃ uttaritaraṃ vā paṇītataraṃ vā na samanupassati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t see any other subtlety of form that’s better or finer than that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena ca rūpasokhummena aññaṃ rūpasokhummaṃ uttaritaraṃ vā paṇītataraṃ vā na pattheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor do they aim for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāsokhummena samannāgato hoti paramena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena ca vedanāsokhummena aññaṃ vedanāsokhummaṃ uttaritaraṃ vā paṇītataraṃ vā na samanupassati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t see any other subtlety of feeling that’s better or finer than that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena ca vedanāsokhummena aññaṃ vedanāsokhummaṃ uttaritaraṃ vā paṇītataraṃ vā na pattheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor do they aim for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññāsokhummena samannāgato hoti paramena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena ca saññāsokhummena aññaṃ saññāsokhummaṃ uttaritaraṃ vā paṇītataraṃ vā na samanupassati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t see any other subtlety of perception that’s better or finer than that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena ca saññāsokhummena aññaṃ saññāsokhummaṃ uttaritaraṃ vā paṇītataraṃ vā na pattheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor do they aim for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhārasokhummena samannāgato hoti paramena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena ca saṅkhārasokhummena aññaṃ saṅkhārasokhummaṃ uttaritaraṃ vā paṇītataraṃ vā na samanupassati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t see any other subtlety of choices that’s better or finer than that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena ca saṅkhārasokhummena aññaṃ saṅkhārasokhummaṃ uttaritaraṃ vā paṇītataraṃ vā na pattheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor do they aim for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri sokhummānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of subtlety. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpasokhummataṃ ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing the subtlety of form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanānañca sambhavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the cause of feelings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññā yato samudeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">where perception comes from, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthaṃ gacchati yattha ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and where it ends; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhāre parato ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and knowing choices as other, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhato no ca attato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as suffering and not-self, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve sammaddaso bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that mendicant sees rightly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santo santipade rato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">peaceful, in love with the state of peace. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhāreti antimaṃ dehaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They bear their final body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jetvā māraṃ savāhinin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having vanquished Māra and his mount.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
