<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.013-13. Padhānasutta  - 13. Effort </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.013. 13. Padhānasutta  - 13. Effort </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Caravagga  - 2. Walking </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, sammappadhānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four right efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ anuppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri sammappadhānānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four right efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammappadhānā māradheyyābhibhūtā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By rightly striving, they’ve crushed Māra’s sovereignty; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te asitā jātimaraṇabhayassa pāragū; </span></p>
<p class="p3">unattached, they’ve gone beyond the danger of birth and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tusitā jetvā māraṃ savāhiniṃ te anejā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contented and unstirred, they’ve vanquished Māra and his mount; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaṃ namucibalaṃ upātivattā te sukhitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">now they’ve gone beyond all Namuci’s forces, they’re happy.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
