<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.040-40. Udāyīsutta  - 40. With Udāyī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.040. 40. Udāyīsutta  - 40. With Udāyī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Cakkavagga  - 4. Situations </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho udāyī brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho udāyī brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Udāyī the brahmin went up to the Buddha, … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhavampi no gotamo yaññaṃ vaṇṇetī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Does Master Gotama praise sacrifice?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, sabbaṃ yaññaṃ vaṇṇemi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, I don’t praise all sacrifices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na panāhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, sabbaṃ yaññaṃ na vaṇṇemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor do I criticize all sacrifices. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpe kho, brāhmaṇa, yaññe gāvo haññanti, ajeḷakā haññanti, kukkuṭasūkarā haññanti, vividhā pāṇā saṅghātaṃ āpajjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of animals are slaughtered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evarūpaṃ kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, sārambhaṃ yaññaṃ na vaṇṇemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t praise that kind of violent sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpañhi, brāhmaṇa, sārambhaṃ yaññaṃ na upasaṅkamanti arahanto vā arahattamaggaṃ vā samāpannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpe ca kho, brāhmaṇa, yaññe neva gāvo haññanti, na ajeḷakā haññanti, na kukkuṭasūkarā haññanti, na vividhā pāṇā saṅghātaṃ āpajjanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of animals are not slaughtered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evarūpaṃ kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, nirārambhaṃ yaññaṃ vaṇṇemi, yadidaṃ niccadānaṃ anukulayaññaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I do praise that kind of non-violent sacrifice; for example, a regular gift as an ongoing family sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpañhi, brāhmaṇa, nirārambhaṃ yaññaṃ upasaṅkamanti arahanto vā arahattamaggaṃ vā samāpannāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhisaṅkhataṃ nirārambhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The kind of sacrifice that’s allowable and timely, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaññaṃ kālena kappiyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">well prepared and non-violent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tādisaṃ upasaṃyanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is attended by </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññatā brahmacārayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">disciplined spiritual practitioners. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivaṭacchadā ye loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddhas—who have drawn back the veil from the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vītivattā kulaṃ gatiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">transcending time and rebirth—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaññametaṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">praise this sacrifice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhā yaññassa kovidā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as they are expert in sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaññe vā yadi vā saddhe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’ve prepared a suitable offering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">habyaṃ katvā yathārahaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">whether as sacrifice or for ancestors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasannacitto yajati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sacrifice it with confident heart, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhette brahmacārisu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the fertile field of spiritual practitioners. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suhutaṃ suyiṭṭhaṃ suppattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When it’s well-gotten, well-offered, and well-sacrificed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dakkhiṇeyyesu yaṃ kataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to those worthy of a religious donation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañño ca vipulo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a sacrifice is truly abundant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasīdanti ca devatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and even the deities are pleased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ yajitvā medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an intelligent, faithful person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddho muttena cetasā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">sacrifices like this, with a mind of letting go, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abyābajjhaṃ sukhaṃ lokaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that astute one is reborn </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇḍito upapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in a happy, pleasing world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkavaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakko saṅgaho sīho, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasādo vassakārena pañcamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Doṇo aparihāniyo patilīno, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujjayo udāyinā te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
