<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.004-4. Dutiyakhatasutta  - 4. Broken (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.004. 4. Dutiyakhatasutta  - 4. Broken (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhaṇḍagāmavagga  - 1. At Bhaṇḍa Village </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūsu, bhikkhave, micchā paṭipajjamāno bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a foolish, incompetent bad person acts wrongly toward four people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesu catūsu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātari, bhikkhave, micchā paṭipajjamāno bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mother … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pitari, bhikkhave, micchā paṭipajjamāno … pe … tathāgate, bhikkhave, micchā paṭipajjamāno … pe … tathāgatasāvake, bhikkhave, micchā paṭipajjamāno bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">father … a Realized One … and a disciple of a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesu kho, bhikkhave, catūsu micchā paṭipajjamāno bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a foolish, incompetent bad person acts wrongly toward these four people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūsu, bhikkhave, sammā paṭipajjamāno paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca puññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an astute, competent good person acts rightly toward four people they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesu catūsu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātari, bhikkhave, sammā paṭipajjamāno paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca puññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mother … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pitari, bhikkhave, sammā paṭipajjamāno … pe … tathāgate, bhikkhave, sammā paṭipajjamāno … pe … tathāgatasāvake, bhikkhave, sammā paṭipajjamāno paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca puññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">father … a Realized One … and a disciple of a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesu kho, bhikkhave, catūsu sammā paṭipajjamāno paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca puññaṃ pasavatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an astute, competent good person acts rightly toward these four people they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātari pitari cāpi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who does wrong </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo micchā paṭipajjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by their mother or father, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgate vā sambuddhe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">or a Realized One, a Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha vā tassa sāvake; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or one of their disciples, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuñca so pasavati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">makes much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apuññaṃ tādiso naro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya naṃ adhammacariyāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of their unprincipled conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātāpitūsu paṇḍitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">toward their parents, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idheva naṃ garahanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re criticized in this life by the astute, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Peccāpāyañca gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they depart to be reborn in a place of loss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātari pitari cāpi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who does right </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo sammā paṭipajjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by their mother and father, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgate vā sambuddhe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">or a Realized One, a Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha vā tassa sāvake; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or one of their disciples, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuñca so pasavati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">makes much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puññaṃ etādiso naro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya naṃ dhammacariyāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of their principled conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāpitūsu paṇḍitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">toward their parents, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idheva naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re praised in this life by the astute, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pecca sagge pamodatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they depart to rejoice in heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
