<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.006-6. Appassutasutta  - 6. A Little Learning </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.006. 6. Appassutasutta  - 6. A Little Learning </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhaṇḍagāmavagga  - 1. At Bhaṇḍa Village </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? A person may have: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appassuto sutena anupapanno, appassuto sutena upapanno, bahussuto sutena anupapanno, bahussuto sutena upapanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">~Little learning and not get the point of learning. ~Little learning but get the point of learning. ~Much learning but not get the point of learning. ~Much learning and get the point of learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo appassuto hoti sutena anupapanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a person learned little and not got the point of learning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa appakaṃ sutaṃ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person has learned little of the </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ geyyaṃ veyyākaraṇaṃ gāthā udānaṃ itivuttakaṃ jātakaṃ abbhutadhammaṃ vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa appakassa sutassa na atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya dhammānudhammappaṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And with the little they’ve learned, they understand neither the meaning nor the text, nor do they practice in line with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo appassuto hoti sutena anupapanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person has learned little and not got the point of learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo appassuto hoti sutena upapanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a person learned little but has got the point of learning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa appakaṃ sutaṃ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person has learned little of the </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ geyyaṃ veyyākaraṇaṃ gāthā udānaṃ itivuttakaṃ jātakaṃ abbhutadhammaṃ vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa appakassa sutassa atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya dhammānudhammappaṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But with the little they’ve learned, they understand the meaning and the text, and they practice in line with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo appassuto hoti sutena upapanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person has learned little but has got the point of learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo bahussuto hoti sutena anupapanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a person learned much but hasn't got the point of learning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa bahukaṃ sutaṃ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person has learned much of the </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ geyyaṃ veyyākaraṇaṃ gāthā udānaṃ itivuttakaṃ jātakaṃ abbhutadhammaṃ vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa bahukassa sutassa na atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya dhammānudhammappaṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But even though they’ve learned much, they understand neither the meaning nor the text, nor do they practice in line with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo bahussuto hoti sutena anupapanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person has learned much but hasn't got the point of learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo bahussuto hoti sutena upapanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a person learned much and has got the point of learning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa bahukaṃ sutaṃ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person has learned much of the </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ geyyaṃ veyyākaraṇaṃ gāthā udānaṃ itivuttakaṃ jātakaṃ abbhutadhammaṃ vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa bahukassa sutassa atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya dhammānudhammappaṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And with the large amount they’ve learned, they understand the meaning and the text, and they practice in line with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo bahussuto hoti sutena upapanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person has learned much and has got the point of learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasminti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appassutopi ce hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t learn much, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlesu asamāhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and aren’t steady in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhayena naṃ garahanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll criticize you on both counts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlato ca sutena ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for your ethics and your learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appassutopi ce hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t learn much, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlesu susamāhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and you are steady in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlato naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll praise your ethical conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa sampajjate sutaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">since your learning has succeeded. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahussutopi ce hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you learn much, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlesu asamāhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">but aren’t steady in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlato naṃ garahanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll criticize your ethical conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāssa sampajjate sutaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for your learning hasn’t succeeded. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahussutopi ce hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you learn much, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlesu susamāhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and you are steady in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhayena naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll praise you on both counts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlato ca sutena ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for your ethics and your learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahussutaṃ dhammadharaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wise disciple of the Buddha </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappaññaṃ buddhasāvakaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has much learning, and has memorized the teachings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhaṃ jambonadasseva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is like a coin of mountain gold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko taṃ ninditumarahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is worthy of criticizing them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devāpi naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even the gods praise them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmunāpi pasaṃsito”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and by Brahmā, too, they’re praised.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
