<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.117-117. Ārakkhasutta  - 117. Guarding </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.117. 117. Ārakkhasutta  - 117. Guarding </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Kesivagga  - 12. With Kesi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūsu, bhikkhave, ṭhānesu attarūpena appamādo sati cetaso ārakkho karaṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in your own way you should practice diligence, mindfulness, and guarding of the mind in four situations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesu catūsu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mā me rajanīyesu dhammesu cittaṃ rajjī’ti attarūpena appamādo sati cetaso ārakkho karaṇīyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May my mind not be aroused by things that arouse greed.’ In your own way you should practice diligence, mindfulness, and guarding of the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me dosanīyesu dhammesu cittaṃ dussī’ti attarūpena appamādo sati cetaso ārakkho karaṇīyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May my mind not be angered by things that provoke hate.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me mohanīyesu dhammesu cittaṃ muyhī’ti attarūpena appamādo sati cetaso ārakkho karaṇīyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May my mind not be deluded by things that promote delusion.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me madanīyesu dhammesu cittaṃ majjī’ti attarūpena appamādo sati cetaso ārakkho karaṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May my mind not be intoxicated by things that intoxicate.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno rajanīyesu dhammesu cittaṃ na rajjati vītarāgattā, dosanīyesu dhammesu cittaṃ na dussati vītadosattā, mohanīyesu dhammesu cittaṃ na muyhati vītamohattā, madanīyesu dhammesu cittaṃ na majjati vītamadattā, so na chambhati na kampati na vedhati na santāsaṃ āpajjati, na ca pana samaṇavacanahetupi gacchatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant’s mind is no longer affected by greed, hate, delusion, or intoxication because they’ve got rid of these things, they don’t cower or shake or tremble or get scared, nor are they persuaded by the teachings of other ascetics.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
