<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.037-37. Aparihāniyasutta  - 37. Non-decline </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.037. 37. Aparihāniyasutta  - 37. Non-decline </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Cakkavagga  - 4. Situations </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu abhabbo parihānāya nibbānasseva santike. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant who has four qualities can’t decline, and is close to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlasampanno hoti, indriyesu guttadvāro hoti, bhojane mattaññū hoti, jāgariyaṃ anuyutto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant accomplished in ethics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu indriyesu guttadvāro hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant guard the sense doors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati; rakkhati cakkhundriyaṃ; cakkhundriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hearing a sound with their ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smelling an odor with their nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tasting a flavor with their tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling a touch with their body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing a thought with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati; rakkhati manindriyaṃ; manindriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu indriyesu guttadvāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant guards the sense doors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu bhojane mattaññū hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant eat in moderation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu paṭisaṅkhā yoniso āhāraṃ āhāreti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant reflects properly on the food that they eat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘neva davāya na madāya na maṇḍanāya na vibhūsanāya; yāvadeva imassa kāyassa ṭhitiyā yāpanāya vihiṃsūparatiyā brahmacariyānuggahāya. Iti purāṇañca vedanaṃ paṭihaṅkhāmi, navañca vedanaṃ na uppādessāmi, yātrā ca me bhavissati, anavajjatā ca phāsuvihāro cā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will live blamelessly and at ease.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu bhojane mattaññū hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant eats in moderation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu jāgariyaṃ anuyutto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant dedicated to wakefulness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu divasaṃ caṅkamena nisajjāya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodheti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind from obstacles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattiyā paṭhamaṃ yāmaṃ caṅkamena nisajjāya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodheti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the evening, they continue to practice walking and sitting meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattiyā majjhimaṃ yāmaṃ dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyyaṃ kappeti, pāde pādaṃ accādhāya, sato sampajāno uṭṭhānasaññaṃ manasi karitvā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the middle of the night, they lie down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattiyā pacchimaṃ yāmaṃ paccuṭṭhāya caṅkamena nisajjāya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the last part of the night, they get up and continue to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu jāgariyaṃ anuyutto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a mendicant is dedicated to wakefulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu abhabbo parihānāya, nibbānasseva santiketi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has these four qualities can’t decline, and has drawn near to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīle patiṭṭhito bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Established in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">indriyesu ca saṃvuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">restrained in the sense faculties, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanamhi ca mattaññū, </span></p>
<p class="p3">eating in moderation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jāgariyaṃ anuyuñjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and dedicated to wakefulness; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vihārī ātāpī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a mendicant lives like this, with keen energy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahorattamatandito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">tireless all night and day, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāvayaṃ kusalaṃ dhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">developing skillful qualities, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yogakkhemassa pattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the sake of finding sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamādarato bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who loves to be diligent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pamāde bhayadassi vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing fear in negligence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhabbo parihānāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">can’t decline, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbānasseva santike”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has drawn near to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
