<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.034-34. Aggappasādasutta  - 34. The Best Kinds of Confidence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.034. 34. Aggappasādasutta  - 34. The Best Kinds of Confidence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Cakkavagga  - 4. Situations </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, aggappasādā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four kinds of confidence are the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, bhikkhave, sattā apadā vā dvipadā vā catuppadā vā bahuppadā vā rūpino vā arūpino vā saññino vā asaññino vā nevasaññināsaññino vā, tathāgato tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings—be they footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless; with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor non-perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye, bhikkhave, buddhe pasannā, agge te pasannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have confidence in the Buddha have confidence in the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agge kho pana pasannānaṃ aggo vipāko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having confidence in the best, the result is the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, bhikkhave, dhammā saṅkhatā, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble eightfold path is said to be the best of all conditioned things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye, bhikkhave, ariye aṭṭhaṅgike magge pasannā, agge te pasannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have confidence in the noble eightfold path have confidence in the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agge kho pana pasannānaṃ aggo vipāko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having confidence in the best, the result is the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, bhikkhave, dhammā saṅkhatā vā asaṅkhatā vā, virāgo tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṃ madanimmadano pipāsavinayo ālayasamugghāto vaṭṭupacchedo taṇhākkhayo virāgo nirodho nibbānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fading away is said to be the best of all things whether conditioned or unconditioned. That is, the quelling of vanity, the removing of thirst, the abolishing of clinging, the breaking of the round, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye, bhikkhave, virāge dhamme pasannā, agge te pasannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have confidence in the teaching of fading away have confidence in the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agge kho pana pasannānaṃ aggo vipāko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having confidence in the best, the result is the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, bhikkhave, saṅghā vā gaṇā vā, tathāgatasāvakasaṅgho tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṃ cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, straightforward, methodical, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye, bhikkhave, saṅghe pasannā, agge te pasannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have confidence in the Saṅgha have confidence in the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agge kho pana pasannānaṃ aggo vipāko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having confidence in the best, the result is the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro aggappasādāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four best kinds of confidence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggato ve pasannānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For those who, knowing the best teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aggaṃ dhammaṃ vijānataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">base their confidence on the best—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agge buddhe pasannānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">confident in the best Awakened One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dakkhiṇeyye anuttare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">supremely worthy of a religious donation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agge dhamme pasannānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">confident in the best teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">virāgūpasame sukhe; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the bliss of fading and stilling; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agge saṅghe pasannānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">confident in the best Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puññakkhette anuttare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the supreme field of merit—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggasmiṃ dānaṃ dadataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">giving gifts to the best, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aggaṃ puññaṃ pavaḍḍhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the best of merit grows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggaṃ āyu ca vaṇṇo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the best lifespan, beauty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaso kitti sukhaṃ balaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fame, reputation, happiness, and strength. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggassa dātā medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An intelligent person gives to the best, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aggadhammasamāhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">settled on the best teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devabhūto manusso vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they become a god or human, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aggappatto pamodatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they rejoice at reaching the best.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
