<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.003-3. Paṭhamakhatasutta  - 3. Broken (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.003. 3. Paṭhamakhatasutta  - 3. Broken (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhaṇḍagāmavagga  - 1. At Bhaṇḍa Village </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a foolish, incompetent bad person has four qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ananuvicca apariyogāhetvā avaṇṇārahassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of criticism, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ananuvicca apariyogāhetvā vaṇṇārahassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they criticize those deserving of praise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ananuvicca apariyogāhetvā appasādanīye ṭhāne pasādaṃ upadaṃseti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They arouse faith in things that are dubious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ananuvicca apariyogāhetvā pasādanīye ṭhāne appasādaṃ upadaṃseti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they don’t arouse faith in things that are inspiring. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a foolish, incompetent bad person has these four qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca puññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an astute, competent good person has four qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuvicca pariyogāhetvā avaṇṇārahassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of criticism, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuvicca pariyogāhetvā vaṇṇārahassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they praise those deserving of praise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuvicca pariyogāhetvā appasādanīye ṭhāne appasādaṃ upadaṃseti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t arouse faith in things that are dubious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuvicca pariyogāhetvā pasādanīye ṭhāne pasādaṃ upadaṃseti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they do arouse faith in things that are inspiring. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca puññaṃ pasavatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an astute, competent good person has these four qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo nindiyaṃ pasaṃsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you praise someone worthy of criticism, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā nindati yo pasaṃsiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or criticize someone worthy of praise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicināti mukhena so kaliṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you choose bad luck with your own mouth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalinā tena sukhaṃ na vindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll never find happiness that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamatto ayaṃ kali, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bad luck at dice is a trivial thing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo akkhesu dhanaparājayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if all you lose is your money </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbassāpi sahāpi attanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and all you own, even yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva mahantataro kali; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s really terrible luck </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sugatesu manaṃ padosaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is to hate the holy ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sataṃ sahassānaṃ nirabbudānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For more than two quinquadecillion years, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattiṃsatī pañca ca abbudāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and another five quattuordecillion years, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yamariyagarahī nirayaṃ upeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a slanderer of noble ones goes to hell, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vācaṃ manañca paṇidhāya pāpakan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having aimed bad words and thoughts at them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
