<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.062-62. Ānaṇyasutta  - 62. Debtlessness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.062. 62. Ānaṇyasutta  - 62. Debtlessness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Pattakammavagga  - 7. Deeds of Substance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, gahapati, sukhāni adhigamanīyāni gihinā kāmabhoginā kālena kālaṃ samayena samayaṃ upādāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, these four kinds of happiness can be earned by a layperson who enjoys sensual pleasures, depending on time and occasion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthisukhaṃ, bhogasukhaṃ, ānaṇyasukhaṃ, anavajjasukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The happiness of ownership, using wealth, debtlessness, and blamelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, gahapati, atthisukhaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the happiness of ownership? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, kulaputtassa bhogā honti uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatā bāhābalaparicitā sedāvakkhittā dhammikā dhammaladdhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a gentleman owns legitimate wealth that he has earned by his own efforts and initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘bhogā me atthi uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatā bāhābalaparicitā sedāvakkhittā dhammikā dhammaladdhā’ti adhigacchati sukhaṃ, adhigacchati somanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he reflects on this, he’s filled with pleasure and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, gahapati, atthisukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘the happiness of ownership’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, gahapati, bhogasukhaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the happiness of using wealth? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, kulaputto uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi paribhuñjati puññāni ca karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth, and makes merit with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi paribhuñjāmi puññāni ca karomī’ti adhigacchati sukhaṃ, adhigacchati somanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he reflects on this, he’s filled with pleasure and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, gahapati, bhogasukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘the happiness of using wealth’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, gahapati, ānaṇyasukhaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the happiness of debtlessness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, kulaputto na kassaci kiñci dhāreti appaṃ vā bahuṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a gentleman owes no debt, large or small, to anyone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘na kassaci kiñci dhāremi appaṃ vā bahuṃ vā’ti adhigacchati sukhaṃ, adhigacchati somanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he reflects on this, he’s filled with pleasure and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, gahapati, ānaṇyasukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘the happiness of debtlessness’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, gahapati, anavajjasukhaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the happiness of blamelessness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako anavajjena kāyakammena samannāgato hoti, anavajjena vacīkammena samannāgato hoti, anavajjena manokammena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has blameless conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘anavajjenamhi kāyakammena samannāgato, anavajjena vacīkammena samannāgato, anavajjena manokammena samannāgato’ti adhigacchati sukhaṃ, adhigacchati somanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he reflects on this, he’s filled with pleasure and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, gahapati, anavajjasukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘the happiness of blamelessness’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, gahapati, cattāri sukhāni adhigamanīyāni gihinā kāmabhoginā kālena kālaṃ samayena samayaṃ upādāyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four kinds of happiness can be earned by a layperson who enjoys sensual pleasures, depending on time and occasion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ānaṇyasukhaṃ ñatvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing the happiness of debtlessness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho atthisukhaṃ paraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the extra happiness of possession, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhuñjaṃ bhogasukhaṃ macco, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a mortal enjoying the happiness of using wealth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato paññā vipassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then sees clearly with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vipassamāno jānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing clearly, a clever person knows </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho bhoge sumedhaso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">both kinds of happiness: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anavajjasukhassetaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the other kind is not worth a sixteenth part </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalaṃ nāgghati soḷasin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of the happiness of blamelessness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
