<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.259-259. Paṭhamaājānīyasutta  - 259. A Thoroughbred (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.259. 259. Paṭhamaājānīyasutta  - 259. A Thoroughbred (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">26. Abhiññāvagga  - 26. Insight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato rañño bhadro assājānīyo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅganteva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with four factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño bhadro assājānīyo vaṇṇasampanno ca hoti balasampanno ca javasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, fast, and well-proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi aṅgehi samannāgato rañño bhadro assājānīyo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅganteva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fine royal thoroughbred with these four factors is worthy of a king. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant with four factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vaṇṇasampanno ca hoti balasampanno ca javasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is beautiful, strong, fast, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vaṇṇasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant beautiful? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the code of conduct, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vaṇṇasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is beautiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu balasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant strong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya, thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu balasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is strong. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu javasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant fast? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when they truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu javasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is fast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ārohapariṇāhasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant well proportioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu lābhī hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant receives robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ārohapariṇāhasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these four factors … is the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
