<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.147-147. Dutiyakālasutta  - 147. Times (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.147. 147. Dutiyakālasutta  - 147. Times (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Ābhāvagga  - 15. Brightness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, kālā sammā bhāviyamānā sammā anuparivattiyamānā anupubbena āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pāpenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when these four times are rightly developed and progressed, they gradually lead to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālena dhammassavanaṃ, kālena dhammasākacchā, kālena sammasanā, kālena vipassanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A time for listening to the teaching, a time for discussing the teaching, a time for serenity, and a time for discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro kālā sammā bhāviyamānā sammā anuparivattiyamānā anupubbena āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pāpenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uparipabbate thullaphusitake deve vassante taṃ udakaṃ yathāninnaṃ pavattamānaṃ pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūreti; pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūrā kusobbhe paripūrenti; kusobbhā paripūrā mahāsobbhe paripūrenti; mahāsobbhā paripūrā kunnadiyo paripūrenti; kunnadiyo paripūrā mahānadiyo paripūrenti; mahānadiyo paripūrā samuddaṃ paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like when it rains heavily on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ime cattāro kālā sammā bhāviyamānā sammā anuparivattiyamānā anupubbena āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pāpentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when these four times are rightly developed and progressed, they gradually lead to the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
