<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.175-175. Upavāṇasutta  - 175. With Upavāṇa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.175. 175. Upavāṇasutta  - 175. With Upavāṇa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Sañcetaniyavagga  - 18. Intention </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upavāṇo yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Upavāṇa went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā upavāṇo āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, Upavāṇa sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, vijjāyantakaro hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, do you become a terminator because of knowledge?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hidaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s not it, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ panāvuso sāriputta, caraṇenantakaro hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do you become a terminator because of conduct?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hidaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s not it, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ panāvuso sāriputta, vijjācaraṇenantakaro hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do you become a terminator because of both knowledge and conduct?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hidaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s not it, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ panāvuso sāriputta, aññatra vijjācaraṇenantakaro hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do you become a terminator for some reason other than knowledge and conduct?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hidaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s not it, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Kiṃ nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, vijjāyantakaro hotī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, when asked whether you become a terminator because of knowledge or conduct or knowledge and conduct, or for some other reason, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘no hidaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you say ‘that’s not it’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panāvuso sāriputta, caraṇenantakaro hotī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘no hidaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panāvuso sāriputta, vijjācaraṇenantakaro hotī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘no hidaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panāvuso sāriputta, aññatra vijjācaraṇenantakaro hotī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘no hidaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā kathaṃ panāvuso, antakaro hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How then do you become a terminator?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vijjāya ce, āvuso, antakaro abhavissa, saupādānova samāno antakaro abhavissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, if you became a terminator because of knowledge, then even someone who still has grasping could be a terminator. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caraṇena ce, āvuso, antakaro abhavissa, saupādānova samāno antakaro abhavissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you became a terminator because of conduct, then even someone who still has grasping could be a terminator. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjācaraṇena ce, āvuso, antakaro abhavissa, saupādānova samāno antakaro abhavissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you became a terminator because of both knowledge and conduct, then even someone who still has grasping could be a terminator. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra vijjācaraṇena ce, āvuso, antakaro abhavissa, puthujjano antakaro abhavissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you became a terminator for some reason other than knowledge and conduct, then even an ordinary person could be a terminator. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puthujjano hi, āvuso, aññatra vijjācaraṇena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For an ordinary person lacks knowledge and conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caraṇavipanno kho, āvuso, yathābhūtaṃ na jānāti na passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reverend, someone lacking good conduct does not know and see things as they are. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caraṇasampanno yathābhūtaṃ jānāti passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone accomplished in good conduct knows and sees things as they are. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathābhūtaṃ jānaṃ passaṃ antakaro hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing and seeing things as they are, one is a terminator.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
