<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.185-185. Brāhmaṇasaccasutta  - 185. Truths of the Brahmins </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.185. 185. Brāhmaṇasaccasutta  - 185. Truths of the Brahmins </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 19. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā abhiññātā abhiññātā paribbājakā sippinikātīre paribbājakārāme paṭivasanti, seyyathidaṃ annabhāro varadharo sakuludāyī ca paribbājako aññe ca abhiññātā abhiññātā paribbājakā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time several very well-known wanderers were residing in the monastery of the wanderers on the bank of the Sappinī river. They included Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī, and other very well-known wanderers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena sippinikātīre paribbājakārāmo tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the wanderer’s monastery on the bank of the Sappinī river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ sannisinnānaṃ sannipatitānaṃ ayamantarā kathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time this discussion came up while those wanderers who follow other paths were sitting together, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“itipi brāhmaṇasaccāni, itipi brāhmaṇasaccānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The truths of the brahmins are like this; the truths of the brahmins are like that.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā yena te paribbājakā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Nisajja kho bhagavā te paribbājake etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha went up to those wanderers, sat down on the seat spread out, and said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kāya nuttha, paribbājakā, etarahi kathāya sannisinnā, kā ca pana vo antarākathā vippakatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wanderers, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was unfinished?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bho gotama, amhākaṃ sannisinnānaṃ sannipatitānaṃ ayamantarākathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, Master Gotama, this discussion came up among us while we were sitting together: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi brāhmaṇasaccāni, itipi brāhmaṇasaccānī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The truths of the brahmins are like this; the truths of the brahmins are like that.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, paribbājakā, brāhmaṇasaccāni mayā sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā paveditāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wanderers, I declare these four truths of the brahmins, having realized them with my own insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, paribbājakā, brāhmaṇo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a brahmin who says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sabbe pāṇā avajjhā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘No sentient beings should be killed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti vadaṃ brāhmaṇo saccaṃ āha, no musā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying this, a brahmin speaks the truth, not lies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena na samaṇoti maññati, na brāhmaṇoti maññati, na seyyohamasmīti maññati, na sadisohamasmīti maññati, na hīnohamasmīti maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t think of themselves as an ‘ascetic’ or ‘brahmin’ because of that. Nor do they think ‘I’m better’ or ‘I’m equal’ or ‘I’m worse’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca yadeva tattha saccaṃ tadabhiññāya pāṇānaṃyeva anuddayāya anukampāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, they simply practice out of kindness and compassion for living creatures, having had insight into the truth of that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, paribbājakā, brāhmaṇo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another brahmin who says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sabbe kāmā aniccā dukkhā vipariṇāmadhammā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘All sensual pleasures are impermanent, suffering, and perishable.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti vadaṃ brāhmaṇo saccamāha, no musā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying this, a brahmin speaks the truth, not lies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena na samaṇoti maññati, na brāhmaṇoti maññati, na seyyohamasmīti maññati, na sadisohamasmīti maññati, na hīnohamasmīti maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t think of themselves as an ‘ascetic’ or ‘brahmin’ because of that. Nor do they think ‘I’m better’ or ‘I’m equal’ or ‘I’m worse’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca yadeva tattha saccaṃ tadabhiññāya kāmānaṃyeva nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, they simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding sensual pleasures, having had insight into the truth of that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, paribbājakā, brāhmaṇo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another brahmin who says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sabbe bhavā aniccā … pe … tadabhiññāya bhavānaṃyeva nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘All states of existence are impermanent, suffering, and perishable.’ … They simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future lives, having had insight into the truth of that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, paribbājakā, brāhmaṇo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another brahmin who says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāhaṃ kvacani kassaci kiñcanatasmiṃ na ca mama kvacani katthaci kiñcanatatthī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I don’t belong to anyone anywhere. And nothing belongs to me anywhere.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti vadaṃ brāhmaṇo saccaṃ āha, no musā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying this, a brahmin speaks the truth, not lies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena na samaṇoti maññati, na brāhmaṇoti maññati, na seyyohamasmīti maññati, na sadisohamasmīti maññati, na hīnohamasmīti maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t think of themselves as an ‘ascetic’ or ‘brahmin’ because of that. Nor do they think ‘I’m better’ or ‘I’m equal’ or ‘I’m worse’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca yadeva tattha saccaṃ tadabhiññāya ākiñcaññaṃyeva paṭipadaṃ paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, they simply practice the path of nothingness, having had insight into the truth of that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, paribbājakā, cattāri brāhmaṇasaccāni mayā sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā paveditānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four truths of the brahmins that I declare, having realized them with my own insight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
