<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.160-160. Sugatavinayasutta  - 160. The Training of a Holy One </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.160. 160. Sugatavinayasutta  - 160. The Training of a Holy One </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Indriyavagga  - 16. Faculties </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sugato vā, bhikkhave, loke tiṭṭhamāno sugatavinayo vā tadassa bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a Holy One or a Holy One’s training remain in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of compassion for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sugato? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is a Holy One? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, tathāgato loke uppajjati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sugato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a Holy One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sugatavinayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the training of a Holy One? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sugatavinayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the training of a Holy One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ sugato vā, bhikkhave, loke tiṭṭhamāno sugatavinayo vā tadassa bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a Holy One or a Holy One’s training remain in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of compassion for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārome, bhikkhave, dhammā saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhū duggahitaṃ suttantaṃ pariyāpuṇanti dunnikkhittehi padabyañjanehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, the mendicants memorize discourses that they learned incorrectly, with misplaced words and phrases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dunnikkhittassa, bhikkhave, padabyañjanassa atthopi dunnayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the words and phrases are misplaced, the meaning is misinterpreted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū dubbacā honti dovacassakaraṇehi dhammehi samannāgatā akkhamā appadakkhiṇaggāhino anusāsaniṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants are hard to admonish, having qualities that make them hard to admonish. They’re impatient, and don’t take instruction respectfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ye te bhikkhū bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā, te na sakkaccaṃ suttantaṃ paraṃ vācenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned—knowledgeable in the scriptures, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines—don’t carefully make others recite the discourses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ accayena chinnamūlako suttanto hoti appaṭisaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they pass away, the discourses are cut off at the root, with no-one to preserve them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, therā bhikkhū bāhulikā honti sāthalikā, okkamane pubbaṅgamā, paviveke nikkhittadhurā, na vīriyaṃ ārabhanti appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ pacchimā janatā diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who come after them follow their example. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāpi hoti bāhulikā sāthalikā, okkamane pubbaṅgamā, paviveke nikkhittadhurā, na vīriyaṃ ārabhati appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They too become indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro dhammā saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are four things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārome, bhikkhave, dhammā saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhū suggahitaṃ suttantaṃ pariyāpuṇanti sunikkhittehi padabyañjanehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, the mendicants memorize discourses that have been learned correctly, with well placed words and phrases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sunikkhittassa, bhikkhave, padabyañjanassa atthopi sunayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the words and phrases are well placed, the meaning is interpreted correctly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū suvacā honti sovacassakaraṇehi dhammehi samannāgatā khamā padakkhiṇaggāhino anusāsaniṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants are easy to admonish, having qualities that make them easy to admonish. They’re patient, and take instruction respectfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ye te bhikkhū bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā, te sakkaccaṃ suttantaṃ paraṃ vācenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned—knowledgeable in the scriptures, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines—carefully make others recite the discourses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ accayena nacchinnamūlako suttanto hoti sappaṭisaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they pass away, the discourses aren’t cut off at the root, and they have someone to preserve them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, therā bhikkhū na bāhulikā honti na sāthalikā, okkamane nikkhittadhurā, paviveke pubbaṅgamā, vīriyaṃ ārabhanti appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the senior mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ pacchimā janatā diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who come after them follow their example. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāpi hoti na bāhulikā na sāthalikā, okkamane nikkhittadhurā, paviveke pubbaṅgamā, vīriyaṃ ārabhati appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They too aren’t indulgent or slack … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro dhammā saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are four things that lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indriyavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indriyāni saddhā paññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati saṅkhānapañcamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kappo rogo parihāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunī sugatena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
