<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.043-43. Paṭhamakodhagarusutta  - 43. Valuing Anger </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.043. 43. Paṭhamakodhagarusutta  - 43. Valuing Anger </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Rohitassavagga  - 5. With Rohitassa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhagaru na saddhammagaru, makkhagaru na saddhammagaru, lābhagaru na saddhammagaru, sakkāragaru na saddhammagaru. </span></p>
<p class="p3">People who value anger, or denigration, or material possessions, or honor rather than the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhammagaru na kodhagaru, saddhammagaru na makkhagaru, saddhammagaru na lābhagaru, saddhammagaru na sakkāragaru. </span></p>
<p class="p3">People who value the true teaching rather than anger, or denigration, or material possessions, or honor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasminti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhamakkhagarū bhikkhū, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants who value anger and denigration, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lābhasakkāragāravā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">possessions and honor, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na te dhamme virūhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t grow in the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsambuddhadesite. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that was taught by the perfected Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca saddhammagaruno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those who value the true teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vihaṃsu viharanti ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who have lived it, and are living it now, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ve dhamme virūhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these do grow in the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsambuddhadesite”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that was taught by the perfected Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
