<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.209-209. Tatiyapāpadhammasutta  - 209. Bad Character (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.209. 209. Tatiyapāpadhammasutta  - 209. Bad Character (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Sappurisavagga  - 21. A Good Person </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pāpadhammañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, pāpadhammena pāpadhammatarañca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you bad character and worse character, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇadhammañca, kalyāṇadhammena kalyāṇadhammatarañca. Taṃ suṇātha … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">good character and better character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pāpadhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who has bad character? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātī hoti … pe … micchādiṭṭhiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called bad character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pāpadhammena pāpadhammataro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who has worse character? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha bhikkhave, ekacco attanā ca pāṇātipātī hoti, parañca pāṇātipāte samādapeti … pe … attanā ca micchādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca micchādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view. And they encourage others to do these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpadhammena pāpadhammataro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called worse character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kalyāṇadhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who has good character? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti … pe … sammādiṭṭhiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re contented, kind-hearted, with right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kalyāṇadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called good character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kalyāṇadhammena kalyāṇadhammataro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who has better character? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco attanā ca pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, parañca pāṇātipātā veramaṇiyā samādapeti … pe … attanā ca sammādiṭṭhiko hoti, parañca sammādiṭṭhiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They’re contented, kind-hearted, with right view. And they encourage others to do these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kalyāṇadhammena kalyāṇadhammataro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called better character.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
