<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.073-73. Sappurisasutta  - 73. A Good Person </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.073. 73. Sappurisasutta  - 73. A Good Person </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Apaṇṇakavagga  - 8. Guaranteed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato asappuriso veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a bad person can be known by four qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, asappuriso yo hoti parassa avaṇṇo taṃ apuṭṭhopi pātu karoti, ko pana vādo puṭṭhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To start with, a bad person speaks ill of another even when not asked, let alone when asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puṭṭho kho pana pañhābhinīto ahāpetvā alambitvā paripūraṃ vitthārena parassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when led on by questions they speak ill of another in full detail, not leaving anything out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditabbametaṃ, bhikkhave, asappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know that this is a bad person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, asappuriso yo hoti parassa vaṇṇo taṃ puṭṭhopi na pātu karoti, ko pana vādo apuṭṭhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a bad person doesn’t speak well of another even when asked, let alone when not asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puṭṭho kho pana pañhābhinīto hāpetvā lambitvā aparipūraṃ avitthārena parassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when led on by questions they speak well of another without giving the full details, leaving many things out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditabbametaṃ, bhikkhave, asappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know that this is a bad person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, asappuriso yo hoti attano avaṇṇo taṃ puṭṭhopi na pātu karoti, ko pana vādo apuṭṭhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a bad person doesn’t speak ill of themselves even when asked, let alone when not asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puṭṭho kho pana pañhābhinīto hāpetvā lambitvā aparipūraṃ avitthārena attano avaṇṇaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when led on by questions they speak ill of themselves without giving the full details, leaving many things out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditabbametaṃ, bhikkhave, asappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know that this is a bad person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, asappuriso yo hoti attano vaṇṇo taṃ apuṭṭhopi pātu karoti, ko pana vādo puṭṭhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a bad person speaks well of themselves even when not asked, let alone when asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puṭṭho kho pana pañhābhinīto ahāpetvā alambitvā paripūraṃ vitthārena attano vaṇṇaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when led on by questions they speak well of themselves in full detail, not leaving anything out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditabbametaṃ, bhikkhave, asappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know that this is a bad person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato asappuriso veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A bad person can be known by these four qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato sappuriso veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A good person can be known by four qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, sappuriso yo hoti parassa avaṇṇo taṃ puṭṭhopi na pātu karoti, ko pana vādo apuṭṭhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To start with, a good person doesn’t speak ill of another even when asked, let alone when not asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puṭṭho kho pana pañhābhinīto hāpetvā lambitvā aparipūraṃ avitthārena parassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when led on by questions they speak ill of another without giving the full details, leaving many things out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditabbametaṃ, bhikkhave, sappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know that this is a good person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sappuriso yo hoti parassa vaṇṇo taṃ apuṭṭhopi pātu karoti, ko pana vādo puṭṭhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a good person speaks well of another even when not asked, let alone when asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puṭṭho kho pana pañhābhinīto ahāpetvā alambitvā paripūraṃ vitthārena parassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when led on by questions they speak well of another in full detail, not leaving anything out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditabbametaṃ, bhikkhave, sappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know that this is a good person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sappuriso yo hoti attano avaṇṇo taṃ apuṭṭhopi pātu karoti, ko pana vādo puṭṭhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a good person speaks ill of themselves even when not asked, let alone when asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puṭṭho kho pana pañhābhinīto ahāpetvā alambitvā paripūraṃ vitthārena attano avaṇṇaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when led on by questions they speak ill of themselves in full detail, not leaving anything out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditabbametaṃ, bhikkhave, sappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know that this is a good person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sappuriso yo hoti attano vaṇṇo taṃ puṭṭhopi na pātu karoti, ko pana vādo apuṭṭhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a good person doesn’t speak well of themselves even when asked, let alone when not asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puṭṭho kho pana pañhābhinīto hāpetvā lambitvā aparipūraṃ avitthārena attano vaṇṇaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when led on by questions they speak well of themselves without giving the full details, leaving many things out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditabbametaṃ, bhikkhave, sappuriso ayaṃ bhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know that this is a good person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato sappuriso veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A good person can be known by these four qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, vadhukā yaññadeva rattiṃ vā divaṃ vā ānītā hoti, tāvadevassā tibbaṃ hirottappaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sassuyāpi sasurepi sāmikepi antamaso dāsakammakaraporisesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a bride on the day or night she’s first brought to her husband’s home. Right away she sets up a keen sense of conscience and prudence for her mother and father in law, her husband, and even the bondservants, workers, and staff. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā aparena samayena saṃvāsamanvāya vissāsamanvāya sassumpi sasurampi sāmikampi evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But after some time, because of living together and familiarity, she’ll even say to her mother and father in law, or to her husband: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘apetha, kiṃ pana tumhe jānāthā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Go away! What would you know?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco bhikkhu yaññadeva rattiṃ vā divaṃ vā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito hoti, tāvadevassa tibbaṃ hirottappaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti bhikkhūsu bhikkhunīsu upāsakesu upāsikāsu antamaso ārāmikasamaṇuddesesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, on the day or night a mendicant first goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, right away they set up a keen sense of conscience and prudence for the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen, and even the monastery workers and novices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena saṃvāsamanvāya vissāsamanvāya ācariyampi upajjhāyampi evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But after some time, because of living together and familiarity, they’ll even say to their teacher or mentor: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘apetha, kiṃ pana tumhe jānāthā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Go away! What would you know?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘adhunāgatavadhukāsamena cetasā viharissāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will live with hearts like that of a newly wedded bride.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
