<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.021-21. Paṭhamauruvelasutta  - 21. At Uruvelā (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.021. 21. Paṭhamauruvelasutta  - 21. At Uruvelā (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Uruvelavagga  - 3. At Uruvelā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ekamidāhaṃ, bhikkhave, samayaṃ uruvelāyaṃ viharāmi najjā nerañjarāya tīre ajapālanigrodhe paṭhamābhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying near Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">As I was in private retreat this thought came to mind: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘dukkhaṃ kho agāravo viharati appatisso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘One without respect and reverence lives in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ nu kho ahaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ascetic or brahmin should I honor and respect and rely on?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aparipūrassa kho ahaṃ sīlakkhandhassa pāripūriyā aññaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as to complete the full spectrum of ethics, if it were incomplete. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho panāhaṃ passāmi sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya aññaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā attanā sīlasampannataraṃ, yamahaṃ sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I don’t see any other ascetic or brahmin in this world—with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—who is more accomplished than myself in ethics, who I should honor and respect and rely on. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparipūrassa kho ahaṃ samādhikkhandhassa pāripūriyā aññaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as to complete the full spectrum of immersion, if it were incomplete. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho panāhaṃ passāmi sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya aññaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā attanā samādhisampannataraṃ, yamahaṃ sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I don’t see any other ascetic or brahmin … who is more accomplished than myself in immersion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparipūrassa kho ahaṃ paññākkhandhassa pāripūriyā aññaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as to complete the full spectrum of wisdom, if it were incomplete. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho panāhaṃ passāmi sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya aññaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā attanā paññāsampannataraṃ, yamahaṃ sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I don’t see any other ascetic or brahmin in this world … who is more accomplished than myself in wisdom … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparipūrassa kho ahaṃ vimuttikkhandhassa pāripūriyā aññaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as to complete the full spectrum of freedom, if it were incomplete. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho panāhaṃ passāmi sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya aññaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā attanā vimuttisampannataraṃ, yamahaṃ sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I don’t see any other ascetic or brahmin in this world … who is more accomplished than myself in freedom …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yannūnāhaṃ yvāyaṃ dhammo mayā abhisambuddho tameva dhammaṃ sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihareyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Why don’t I honor and respect and rely on the same teaching to which I was awakened?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, brahmā sahampati mama cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya—seyyathāpi nāma balavā puriso samiñjitaṃ vā bāhaṃ pasāreyya, pasāritaṃ vā bāhaṃ samiñjeyya; evamevaṃ—brahmaloke antarahito mama purato pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Brahmā Sahampati, knowing what I was thinking, vanished from the Brahmā realm and appeared in front of me, as easily as a strong man would extend or contract his arm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, brahmā sahampati ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā dakkhiṇaṃ jāṇumaṇḍalaṃ pathaviyaṃ nihantvā yenāhaṃ tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā maṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee, raised his joined palms toward me, and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evametaṃ, bhagavā, evametaṃ, sugata. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, bhante, ahesuṃ atītamaddhānaṃ arahanto sammāsambuddhā tepi bhagavanto dhammaṃyeva sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihariṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived in the past honored and respected and relied on this same teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yepi te, bhante, bhavissanti anāgatamaddhānaṃ arahanto sammāsambuddhā tepi bhagavanto dhammaṃyeva sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya viharissanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who will live in the future will honor and respect and rely on this same teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavāpi, bhante, etarahi arahaṃ sammāsambuddho dhammaṃyeva sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya viharatū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Blessed One, who is the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha at present, also honor and respect and rely on this same teaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca brahmā sahampati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what Brahmā Sahampati said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvā athāparaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ye ca atītā sambuddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘All Buddhas, whether in the past, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca buddhā anāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddhas of the future, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo cetarahi sambuddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the Buddha at present—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahūnaṃ sokanāsano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">destroyer of the sorrows of many—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe saddhammagaruno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">respecting the true teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vihaṃsu viharanti ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they did live, they do live, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athopi viharissanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they also will live. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">esā buddhāna dhammatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the nature of the Buddhas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi attakāmena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore someone who loves themselves, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahattamabhikaṅkhatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">aspiring to transcendence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhammo garukātabbo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">should respect the true teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saraṃ buddhāna sāsanan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca, bhikkhave, brahmā sahampati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what Brahmā Sahampati said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvā maṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he bowed and respectfully circled me, keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha khvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, brahmuno ca ajjhesanaṃ viditvā attano ca patirūpaṃ yvāyaṃ dhammo mayā abhisambuddho tameva dhammaṃ sakkatvā garuṃ katvā upanissāya vihāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing the request of Brahmā and what was suitable for myself, I honored and respected and relied on the same teaching to which I was awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, saṃghopi mahattena samannāgato, atha me saṃghepi gāravo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And since the Saṅgha has also achieved greatness, I also respect the Saṅgha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
