<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.174-174. Ānandasutta  - 174. With Ānanda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.174. 174. Ānandasutta  - 174. With Ānanda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Sañcetaniyavagga  - 18. Intention </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yenāyasmā mahākoṭṭhiko tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā mahākoṭṭhikena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ mahākoṭṭhikaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, Ānanda sat down to one side, and said to Mahākoṭṭhita: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthaññaṃ kiñcī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, when these six fields of contact have faded away and ceased with nothing left over, does anything else exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t put it like that, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā natthaññaṃ kiñcī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Does nothing else exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t put it like that, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthi ca natthi ca aññaṃ kiñcī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do both something else and nothing else exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t put it like that, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā nevatthi no natthaññaṃ kiñcī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do neither something else nor nothing else exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t put it like that, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, when asked these questions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā hevaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you say ‘don’t put it like that’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā natthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā hevaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthi ca natthi ca aññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā hevaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā nevatthi no natthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā hevaṃ, āvuso’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā kathaṃ panāvuso, imassa bhāsitassa attho daṭṭhabbo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">… How then should we see the meaning of this statement?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti vadaṃ appapañcaṃ papañceti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If you say that ‘when the six fields of contact have faded away and ceased with nothing left over, something else exists’, you’re proliferating the unproliferated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā natthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti vadaṃ appapañcaṃ papañceti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you say that ‘nothing else exists’, you’re proliferating the unproliferated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā atthi ca natthi ca aññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti vadaṃ appapañcaṃ papañceti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you say that ‘both something else and nothing else exist’, you’re proliferating the unproliferated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā nevatthi no natthaññaṃ kiñcī’ti, iti vadaṃ appapañcaṃ papañceti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you say that ‘neither something else nor nothing else exist’, you’re proliferating the unproliferated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, āvuso, channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ gati tāvatā papañcassa gati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The scope of the six fields of contact extends as far as the scope of proliferation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā papañcassa gati tāvatā channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ gati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The scope of proliferation extends as far as the scope of the six fields of contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṃ, āvuso, phassāyatanānaṃ asesavirāganirodhā papañcanirodho papañcavūpasamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the six fields of contact fade away and cease with nothing left over, proliferation stops and is stilled.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
