<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.237-237. Ariyamaggasutta  - 237. The Noble Path </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.237. 237. Ariyamaggasutta  - 237. The Noble Path </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">24. Kammavagga  - 24. Deeds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, kammāni mayā sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā paveditāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them with my own insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, kammaṃ kaṇhaṃ kaṇhavipākaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are dark deeds with dark results; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, kammaṃ sukkaṃ sukkavipākaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">bright deeds with bright results; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, kammaṃ kaṇhasukkaṃ kaṇhasukkavipākaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, kammaṃ akaṇhaasukkaṃ akaṇhaasukkavipākaṃ kammakkhayāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the ending of deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, kammaṃ kaṇhaṃ kaṇhavipākaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are dark deeds with dark results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sabyābajjhaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti … pe … idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammaṃ kaṇhaṃ kaṇhavipākaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone makes hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called dark deeds with dark results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, kammaṃ sukkaṃ sukkavipākaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are bright deeds with bright results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco abyābajjhaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti … pe … idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammaṃ sukkaṃ sukkavipākaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone makes pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called bright deeds with bright results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, kammaṃ kaṇhasukkaṃ kaṇhasukkavipākaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sabyābajjhampi abyābajjhampi kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti … pe … idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammaṃ kaṇhasukkaṃ kaṇhasukkavipākaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, kammaṃ akaṇhaasukkaṃ akaṇhaasukkavipākaṃ kammakkhayāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the ending of deeds? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammaṃ akaṇhaasukkaṃ akaṇhaasukkavipākaṃ kammakkhayāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the ending of deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri kammāni mayā sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā paveditānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them with my own insight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
