<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.198-198. Attantapasutta  - 198. Self-mortification </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.198. 198. Attantapasutta  - 198. Self-mortification </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Mahāvagga  - 20. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo attantapo hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person mortifies themselves, pursuing the practice of mortifying themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo parantapo hoti paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person mortifies others, pursuing the practice of mortifying others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo attantapo ca hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto, parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person mortifies themselves and others, pursuing the practice of mortifying themselves and others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo nevattantapo hoti nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person neither mortifies themselves nor others, pursuing the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So neva attantapo na parantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live without wishes in the present life, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo attantapo hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one person mortify themselves, pursuing the practice of mortifying themselves? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco acelako hoti muttācāro hatthāpalekhano naehibhaddantiko natiṭṭhabhaddantiko nābhihaṭaṃ na uddissakataṃ na nimantanaṃ sādiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone goes naked, ignoring conventions. They lick their hands, and don’t come or wait when asked. They don’t consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on purpose for them, or an invitation for a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So na kumbhimukhā paṭiggaṇhāti, na kaḷopimukhā paṭiggaṇhāti, na eḷakamantaraṃ na daṇḍamantaraṃ na musalamantaraṃ na dvinnaṃ bhuñjamānānaṃ na gabbhiniyā na pāyamānāya na purisantaragatāya na saṅkittīsu na yattha sā upaṭṭhito hoti na yattha makkhikā saṇḍasaṇḍacārinī na macchaṃ na maṃsaṃ na suraṃ na merayaṃ na thusodakaṃ pivati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or where there’s a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or liquor or wine, and drink no beer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ekāgāriko vā hoti ekālopiko dvāgāriko vā hoti dvālopiko … pe … sattāgāriko vā hoti sattālopiko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They go to just one house for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekissāpi dattiyā yāpeti dvīhipi dattīhi yāpeti … pe … sattahipi dattīhi yāpeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāreti dvāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāreti … pe … sattāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāreti. Iti evarūpaṃ aḍḍhamāsikampi pariyāyabhattabhojanānuyogamanuyutto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat once a day, once every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They live pursuing the practice of eating food at set intervals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sākabhakkhopi hoti sāmākabhakkhopi hoti nīvārabhakkhopi hoti daddulabhakkhopi hoti haṭabhakkhopi hoti kaṇabhakkhopi hoti ācāmabhakkhopi hoti piññākabhakkhopi hoti tiṇabhakkhopi hoti gomayabhakkhopi hoti; vanamūlaphalāhāropi yāpeti pavattaphalabhojī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sāṇānipi dhāreti masāṇānipi dhāreti chavadussānipi dhāreti paṃsukūlānipi dhāreti tirīṭānipi dhāreti ajinampi dhāreti ajinakkhipampi dhāreti kusacīrampi dhāreti vākacīrampi dhāreti phalakacīrampi dhāreti kesakambalampi dhāreti vāḷakambalampi dhāreti ulūkapakkhampi dhāreti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark, wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls’ wings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kesamassulocakopi hoti kesamassulocanānuyogamanuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They tear out hair and beard, pursuing this practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubbhaṭṭhakopi hoti āsanappaṭikkhitto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They constantly stand, refusing seats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkuṭikopi hoti ukkuṭikappadhānamanuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They squat, committed to the endeavor of squatting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṇṭakāpassayikopi hoti kaṇṭakāpassaye seyyaṃ kappeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāyatatiyakampi udakorohanānuyogamanuyutto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They pursue the practice of immersion in water three times a day, including the evening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti evarūpaṃ anekavihitaṃ kāyassa ātāpanaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so they live pursuing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo attantapo hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one person mortifies themselves, pursuing the practice of mortifying themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo parantapo hoti paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one person mortify others, pursuing the practice of mortifying others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo orabbhiko hoti sūkariko sākuṇiko māgaviko luddo macchaghātako coro coraghātako goghātako bandhanāgāriko, ye vā panaññepi keci kurūrakammantā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is a slaughterer of sheep, pigs, poultry, or deer, a hunter or fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a butcher of cattle, a jailer, or has some other cruel livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo parantapo hoti paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one person mortifies others, pursuing the practice of mortifying others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo attantapo ca hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one person mortify themselves and others, pursuing the practice of mortifying themselves and others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo rājā vā hoti khattiyo muddhāvasitto, brāhmaṇo vā hoti mahāsālo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is an anointed king or a well-to-do brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So puratthimena nagarassa navaṃ santhāgāraṃ kārāpetvā kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kharājinaṃ nivāsetvā sappitelena kāyaṃ abbhañjitvā magavisāṇena piṭṭhiṃ kaṇḍuvamāno navaṃ santhāgāraṃ pavisati, saddhiṃ mahesiyā brāhmaṇena ca purohitena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a new temple built to the east of the city. He shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with ghee and oil. Scratching his back with antlers, he enters the temple with his chief queen and the brahmin high priest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha anantarahitāya bhūmiyā haritupalittāya seyyaṃ kappeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There he lies on the bare ground strewn with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekissāya gāviyā sarūpavacchāya yaṃ ekasmiṃ thane khīraṃ hoti tena rājā yāpeti; yaṃ dutiyasmiṃ thane khīraṃ hoti tena mahesī yāpeti; yaṃ tatiyasmiṃ thane khīraṃ hoti tena brāhmaṇo purohito yāpeti; yaṃ catutthasmiṃ thane khīraṃ hoti tena aggiṃ juhati; avasesena vacchako yāpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The king feeds on the milk from one teat of a cow that has a calf of the same color. The chief queen feeds on the milk from the second teat. The brahmin high priest feeds on the milk from the third teat. The milk from the fourth teat is offered to the flames. The calf feeds on the remainder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakā usabhā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā vacchatarā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā vacchatariyo haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā ajā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā urabbhā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā assā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā rukkhā chijjantu yūpatthāya, ettakā dabbhā lūyantu barihisatthāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Slaughter this many bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats, rams, and horses for the sacrifice! Fell this many trees and reap this much grass for the sacrificial equipment!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepissa te honti dāsāti vā pessāti vā kammakarāti vā tepi daṇḍatajjitā bhayatajjitā assumukhā rudamānā parikammāni karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His bondservants, workers, and staff do their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping, with tearful faces. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo attantapo ca hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one person mortifies themselves and others, pursuing the practice of mortifying themselves and others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo nevattantapo hoti nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one person neither mortify themselves nor others, pursuing the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anattantapo aparantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">living without wishes in the present life, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, tathāgato loke uppajjati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ lokaṃ sadevakaṃ samārakaṃ sabrahmakaṃ sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiṃ pajaṃ sadevamanussaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ dhammaṃ suṇāti gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā aññatarasmiṃ vā kule paccājāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder hears that teaching, or a householder’s child, or someone reborn in some good family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ dhammaṃ sutvā tathāgate saddhaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They gain faith in the Realized One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena saddhāpaṭilābhena samannāgato iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and reflect: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sambādho gharāvāso rajāpatho, abbhokāso pabbajjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Living in a house is cramped and dirty, but the life of one gone forth is wide open. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nayidaṃ sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṃ ekantaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yannūnāhaṃ kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajeyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena appaṃ vā bhogakkhandhaṃ pahāya, mahantaṃ vā bhogakkhandhaṃ pahāya, appaṃ vā ñātiparivaṭṭaṃ pahāya, mahantaṃ vā ñātiparivaṭṭaṃ pahāya, kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pabbajito samāno bhikkhūnaṃ sikkhāsājīvasamāpanno pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti nihitadaṇḍo nihitasattho lajjī dayāpanno, sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once they’ve gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādānaṃ pahāya adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti dinnādāyī dinnapāṭikaṅkhī, athenena sucibhūtena attanā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up stealing. They take only what’s given, and expect only what’s given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abrahmacariyaṃ pahāya brahmacārī hoti ārācārī virato asaddhammā gāmadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the common practice of sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādaṃ pahāya musāvādā paṭivirato hoti saccavādī saccasandho theto paccayiko avisaṃvādako lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They’re honest and trustworthy, and don’t trick the world with their words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pisuṇaṃ vācaṃ pahāya pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, na ito sutvā amutra akkhātā imesaṃ bhedāya, na amutra vā sutvā imesaṃ akkhātā amūsaṃ bhedāya; iti bhinnānaṃ vā sandhātā, sahitānaṃ vā anuppadātā, samaggārāmo samaggarato samagganandī samaggakaraṇiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up divisive speech. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusaṃ vācaṃ pahāya pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti; yā sā vācā nelā kaṇṇasukhā pemanīyā hadayaṅgamā porī bahujanakantā bahujanamanāpā tathārūpiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable, and agreeable to the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samphappalāpaṃ pahāya samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti kālavādī bhūtavādī atthavādī dhammavādī vinayavādī; nidhānavatiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti kālena sāpadesaṃ pariyantavatiṃ atthasaṃhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bījagāmabhūtagāmasamārambhā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They refrain from injuring plants and seeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekabhattiko hoti rattūparato virato vikālabhojanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naccagītavāditavisūkadassanā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They refrain from dancing, singing, music, and seeing shows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mālāgandhavilepanadhāraṇamaṇḍanavibhūsanaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They refrain from beautifying and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uccāsayanamahāsayanā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They refrain from high and luxurious beds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātarūparajatapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They refrain from receiving gold and money, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmakadhaññapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">raw grains, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmakamaṃsapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">raw meat, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthikumārikapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">women and girls, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dāsidāsapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">male and female bondservants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajeḷakapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">goats and sheep, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kukkuṭasūkarapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">chickens and pigs, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthigavāssavaḷavapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">elephants, cows, horses, and mares, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettavatthupaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and fields and land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dūteyyapahiṇagamanānuyogā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They refrain from running errands and messages; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kayavikkayā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">buying and selling; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tulākūṭakaṃsakūṭamānakūṭā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">falsifying weights, metals, or measures; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkoṭanavañcananikatisāciyogā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chedanavadhabandhanaviparāmosaālopasahasākārā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So santuṭṭho hoti kāyaparihārikena cīvarena kucchiparihārikena piṇḍapātena. So yena yeneva pakkamati samādāyeva pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re content with robes to look after the body and alms-food to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma pakkhī sakuṇo yena yeneva ḍeti, sapattabhārova ḍeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti kāyaparihārikena cīvarena kucchiparihārikena piṇḍapātena. So yena yeneva pakkamati, samādāyeva pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and alms-food to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā ariyena sīlakkhandhena samannāgato ajjhattaṃ anavajjasukhaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing a sight with the eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati; rakkhati cakkhundriyaṃ; cakkhundriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hearing a sound with the ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smelling an odor with the nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tasting a flavor with the tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling a touch with the body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing a thought with the mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati; rakkhati manindriyaṃ; manindriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā ariyena indriyasaṃvarena samannāgato ajjhattaṃ abyāsekasukhaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss inside themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So abhikkante paṭikkante sampajānakārī hoti, ālokite vilokite sampajānakārī hoti, samiñjite pasārite sampajānakārī hoti, saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇe sampajānakārī hoti, asite pīte khāyite sāyite sampajānakārī hoti, uccārapassāvakamme sampajānakārī hoti, gate ṭhite nisinne sutte jāgarite bhāsite tuṇhībhāve sampajānakārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā ca ariyena sīlakkhandhena samannāgato, imāya ca ariyāya santuṭṭhiyā samannāgato, iminā ca ariyena indriyasaṃvarena samannāgato, iminā ca ariyena satisampajaññena samannāgato </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have this noble spectrum of ethics, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivittaṃ senāsanaṃ bhajati araññaṃ rukkhamūlaṃ pabbataṃ kandaraṃ giriguhaṃ susānaṃ vanappatthaṃ abbhokāsaṃ palālapuñjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they frequent a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After the meal, they return from alms-round, sit down cross-legged with their body straight, and establish mindfulness right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So abhijjhaṃ loke pahāya vigatābhijjhena cetasā viharati, abhijjhāya cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up desire for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of desire, cleansing the mind of desire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpādapadosaṃ pahāya abyāpannacitto viharati sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī, byāpādapadosā cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up ill will and malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of compassion for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thinamiddhaṃ pahāya vigatathinamiddho viharati ālokasaññī sato sampajāno, thinamiddhā cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaccakukkuccaṃ pahāya anuddhato viharati ajjhattaṃ vūpasantacitto, uddhaccakukkuccā cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up restlessness and remorse, they meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicikicchaṃ pahāya tiṇṇavicikiccho viharati akathaṃkathī kusalesu dhammesu, vicikicchāya cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ime pañca nīvaraṇe pahāya cetaso upakkilese paññāya dubbalīkaraṇe </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivicceva kāmehi … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte pubbenivāsānussatiñāṇāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattānaṃ cutūpapātañāṇāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsavānaṃ khayañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowledge of the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ime āsavā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ āsavasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ āsavanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ āsavanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ jānato evaṃ passato kāmāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, bhavāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, avijjāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo nevattantapo hoti nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how one person neither mortifies themselves nor others, pursuing the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So na attantapo na parantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">living without wishes in the present life, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
