<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.109-109. Rukkhasutta  - 109. Trees </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.109. 109. Rukkhasutta  - 109. Trees </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Valāhakavagga  - 11. Clouds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, rukkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pheggu phegguparivāro, pheggu sāraparivāro, sāro phegguparivāro, sāro sāraparivāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">~One is a softwood surrounded by softwoods, ~one is a softwood surrounded by hardwoods, ~one is a hardwood surrounded by softwoods, and ~one is a hardwood surrounded by hardwoods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro rukkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, cattāro rukkhūpamā puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, these four people similar to trees are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pheggu phegguparivāro, pheggu sāraparivāro, sāro phegguparivāro, sāro sāraparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">~One is a softwood surrounded by softwoods, ~one is a softwood surrounded by hardwoods, ~one is a hardwood surrounded by softwoods, and ~one is a hardwood surrounded by hardwoods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo pheggu hoti phegguparivāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a softwood surrounded by softwoods? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo dussīlo hoti pāpadhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is unethical, of bad character, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parisāpissa hoti dussīlā pāpadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their followers are the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo pheggu hoti phegguparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is a softwood surrounded by softwoods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, rukkho pheggu phegguparivāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That person is like a softwood tree that’s surrounded by softwoods, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo pheggu hoti sāraparivāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a softwood surrounded by hardwoods? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo dussīlo hoti pāpadhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is unethical, of bad character, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parisā ca khvassa hoti sīlavatī kalyāṇadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but their followers are ethical, of good character. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo pheggu hoti sāraparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, rukkho pheggu sāraparivāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo sāro hoti phegguparivāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a hardwood surrounded by softwoods? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sīlavā hoti kalyāṇadhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone is ethical, of good qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parisā ca khvassa hoti dussīlā pāpadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but their followers are unethical, of bad character. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo sāro hoti phegguparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, rukkho sāro phegguparivāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo sāro hoti sāraparivāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person a hardwood surrounded by hardwoods? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sīlavā hoti kalyāṇadhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone is ethical, of good qualities, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parisāpissa hoti sīlavatī kalyāṇadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their followers are the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo sāro hoti sāraparivāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, rukkho sāro sāraparivāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro rukkhūpamā puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four people similar to trees are found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
