<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.125-125. Paṭhamamettāsutta  - 125. Love (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.125. 125. Paṭhamamettāsutta  - 125. Love (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Bhayavagga  - 13. Fears </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo mettāsahagatena cetasā ekaṃ disaṃ pharitvā viharati, tathā dutiyaṃ tathā tatiyaṃ tathā catutthaṃ. Iti uddhamadho tiriyaṃ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena pharitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a person meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tadassādeti, taṃ nikāmeti, tena ca vittiṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They enjoy this and like it and find it satisfying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha ṭhito tadadhimutto tabbahulavihārī aparihīno kālaṃ kurumāno brahmakāyikānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing it, when they die they’re reborn in the company of the gods of Brahmā’s Host. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmakāyikānaṃ, bhikkhave, devānaṃ kappo āyuppamāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The lifespan of the gods of Brahma’s Host is one eon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha puthujjano yāvatāyukaṃ ṭhatvā yāvatakaṃ tesaṃ devānaṃ āyuppamāṇaṃ taṃ sabbaṃ khepetvā nirayampi gacchati tiracchānayonimpi gacchati pettivisayampi gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato pana sāvako tattha yāvatāyukaṃ ṭhatvā yāvatakaṃ tesaṃ devānaṃ āyuppamāṇaṃ taṃ sabbaṃ khepetvā tasmiṃyeva bhave parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they’re extinguished in that very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhave, viseso ayaṃ adhippayāso idaṃ nānākaraṇaṃ sutavato ariyasāvakassa assutavatā puthujjanena, yadidaṃ gatiyā upapattiyā sati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the difference between an educated noble disciple and an uneducated ordinary person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, idhekacco puggalo karuṇāsahagatena cetasā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a person meditates spreading a heart full of compassion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muditāsahagatena cetasā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">rejoicing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsahagatena cetasā ekaṃ disaṃ pharitvā viharati, tathā dutiyaṃ tathā tatiyaṃ tathā catutthaṃ. Iti uddhamadho tiriyaṃ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ upekkhāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena pharitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tadassādeti, taṃ nikāmeti, tena ca vittiṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They enjoy this and like it and find it satisfying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha ṭhito tadadhimutto tabbahulavihārī aparihīno kālaṃ kurumāno ābhassarānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing it, when they die they’re reborn in the company of the gods of streaming radiance. The lifespan of the gods of streaming radiance is two eons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ābhassarānaṃ, bhikkhave, devānaṃ dve kappā āyuppamāṇaṃ … pe … subhakiṇhānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">… they’re reborn in the company of the gods replete with glory. The lifespan of the gods replete with glory is four eons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Subhakiṇhānaṃ, bhikkhave, devānaṃ cattāro kappā āyuppamāṇaṃ … pe … vehapphalānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">… they’re reborn in the company of the gods of abundant fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vehapphalānaṃ, bhikkhave, devānaṃ pañca kappasatāni āyuppamāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The lifespan of the gods of abundant fruit is five hundred eons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha puthujjano yāvatāyukaṃ ṭhatvā yāvatakaṃ tesaṃ devānaṃ āyuppamāṇaṃ taṃ sabbaṃ khepetvā nirayampi gacchati tiracchānayonimpi gacchati pettivisayampi gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato pana sāvako tattha yāvatāyukaṃ ṭhatvā yāvatakaṃ tesaṃ devānaṃ āyuppamāṇaṃ taṃ sabbaṃ khepetvā tasmiṃyeva bhave parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they’re extinguished in that very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhave, viseso ayaṃ adhippayāso idaṃ nānākaraṇaṃ sutavato ariyasāvakassa assutavatā puthujjanena, yadidaṃ gatiyā upapattiyā sati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the difference between an educated noble disciple and an uneducated ordinary person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
