<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.010-10. Yogasutta  - 10. Attachments </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.010. 10. Yogasutta  - 10. Attachments </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhaṇḍagāmavagga  - 1. At Bhaṇḍa Village </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, yogā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmayogo, bhavayogo, diṭṭhiyogo, avijjāyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The attachment to sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kāmayogo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the attachment to sensual pleasures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco kāmānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you don’t truly understand sensual pleasures’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kāmānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ appajānato yo kāmesu kāmarāgo kāmanandī kāmasneho kāmamucchā kāmapipāsā kāmapariḷāho kāmajjhosānaṃ kāmataṇhā sānuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for sensual pleasures linger on inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kāmayogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the attachment to sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kāmayogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is the attachment to sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavayogo ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the attachment to future lives? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco bhavānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you don’t truly understand future lives’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa bhavānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ appajānato yo bhavesu bhavarāgo bhavanandī bhavasneho bhavamucchā bhavapipāsā bhavapariḷāho bhavajjhosānaṃ bhavataṇhā sānuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So lust, delight, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for continued existence linger on inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhavayogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the attachment to future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kāmayogo bhavayogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are the attachments to sensual pleasures and future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhiyogo ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the attachment to views? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco diṭṭhīnaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you don’t truly understand views’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa diṭṭhīnaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ appajānato yo diṭṭhīsu diṭṭhirāgo diṭṭhinandī diṭṭhisneho diṭṭhimucchā diṭṭhipipāsā diṭṭhipariḷāho diṭṭhijjhosānaṃ diṭṭhitaṇhā sānuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So lust, delight, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for views linger on inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, diṭṭhiyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the attachment to views. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kāmayogo bhavayogo diṭṭhiyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are the attachments to sensual pleasures, future lives, and views. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāyogo ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the attachment to ignorance? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you don’t truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ appajānato yā chasu phassāyatanesu avijjā aññāṇaṃ sānuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so ignorance and unknowing of the six fields of contact linger on inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, avijjāyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the attachment to ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kāmayogo bhavayogo diṭṭhiyogo avijjāyogo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are the attachments to sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃyutto pāpakehi akusalehi dhammehi saṃkilesikehi ponobhavikehi sadarehi dukkhavipākehi āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇikehi. Tasmā ayogakkhemīti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone attached to bad, unskillful qualities—corruptions that lead to future lives and are hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death—is called: ‘one who has not found sanctuary from attachments’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro yogā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārome, bhikkhave, visaṃyogā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these four kinds of detachment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmayogavisaṃyogo, bhavayogavisaṃyogo, diṭṭhiyogavisaṃyogo, avijjāyogavisaṃyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Detachment from sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kāmayogavisaṃyogo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is detachment from sensual pleasures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco kāmānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you truly understand sensual pleasures’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kāmānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānato yo kāmesu kāmarāgo kāmanandī kāmasneho kāmamucchā kāmapipāsā kāmapariḷāho kāmajjhosānaṃ kāmataṇhā sā nānuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for sensual pleasures don’t linger on inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kāmayogavisaṃyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called detachment from sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kāmayogavisaṃyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is detachment from sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavayogavisaṃyogo ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is detachment from future lives? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco bhavānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you truly understand future lives’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa bhavānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānato yo bhavesu bhavarāgo bhavanandī bhavasneho bhavamucchā bhavapipāsā bhavapariḷāho bhavajjhosānaṃ bhavataṇhā sā nānuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So lust, delight, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for continued existence don’t linger on inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhavayogavisaṃyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called detachment from future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kāmayogavisaṃyogo bhavayogavisaṃyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is detachment from sensual pleasures and future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhiyogavisaṃyogo ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is detachment from views? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco diṭṭhīnaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you don’t truly understand views’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa diṭṭhīnaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānato yo diṭṭhīsu diṭṭhirāgo diṭṭhinandī diṭṭhisneho diṭṭhimucchā diṭṭhipipāsā diṭṭhipariḷāho diṭṭhijjhosānaṃ diṭṭhitaṇhā sā nānuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So lust, delight, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for views linger on inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, diṭṭhiyogavisaṃyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called detachment from views. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kāmayogavisaṃyogo bhavayogavisaṃyogo diṭṭhiyogavisaṃyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is detachment from sensual pleasures, future lives, and views. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāyogavisaṃyogo ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is detachment from ignorance? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when you truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānato yā chasu phassāyatanesu avijjā aññāṇaṃ sā nānuseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so ignorance and unknowing of the six fields of contact don’t linger on inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, avijjāyogavisaṃyogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called detachment from ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kāmayogavisaṃyogo bhavayogavisaṃyogo diṭṭhiyogavisaṃyogo avijjāyogavisaṃyogo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is detachment from sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">visaṃyutto pāpakehi akusalehi dhammehi saṅkilesikehi ponobhavikehi sadarehi dukkhavipākehi āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇikehi. Tasmā yogakkhemīti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone detached from bad, unskillful qualities—defilements that lead to future lives and are hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death—is called: ‘one who has found sanctuary from attachments’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro visaṃyogāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of detachment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmayogena saṃyuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Attached to both sensual pleasures </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavayogena cūbhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the desire to be reborn in a future life; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhiyogena saṃyuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">attached also to views, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjāya purakkhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with ignorance in the forefront, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattā gacchanti saṃsāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sentient beings continue to transmigrate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātimaraṇagāmino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with ongoing birth and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kāme pariññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those who completely understand sensual pleasures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavayogañca sabbaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the attachment to all future lives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhiyogaṃ samūhacca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the attachment to views eradicated, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjañca virājayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ignorance dispelled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbayogavisaṃyuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">detached from all attachments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te ve yogātigā munī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those sages have gone beyond all attachments.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaṇḍagāmavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anubuddhaṃ papatitaṃ dve, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khatā anusotapañcamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appassuto ca sobhanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vesārajjaṃ taṇhāyogena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
