<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.049-49. Vipallāsasutta  - 49. Perversions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.049. 49. Vipallāsasutta  - 49. Perversions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Rohitassavagga  - 5. With Rohitassa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, saññāvipallāsā cittavipallāsā diṭṭhivipallāsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four perversions of perception, mind, and view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anicce, bhikkhave, niccanti saññāvipallāso cittavipallāso diṭṭhivipallāso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking impermanence as permanence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhe, bhikkhave, sukhanti saññāvipallāso cittavipallāso diṭṭhivipallāso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking suffering as happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattani, bhikkhave, attāti saññāvipallāso cittavipallāso diṭṭhivipallāso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking not-self as self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asubhe, bhikkhave, subhanti saññāvipallāso cittavipallāso diṭṭhivipallāso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking ugliness as beauty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro saññāvipallāsā cittavipallāsā diṭṭhivipallāsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four perversions of perception, mind, and view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārome, bhikkhave, nasaññāvipallāsā nacittavipallāsā nadiṭṭhivipallāsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these four corrections of perception, mind, and view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anicce, bhikkhave, aniccanti nasaññāvipallāso nacittavipallāso nadiṭṭhivipallāso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking impermanence as impermanence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhe, bhikkhave, dukkhanti nasaññāvipallāso nacittavipallāso nadiṭṭhivipallāso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking suffering as suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattani, bhikkhave, anattāti nasaññāvipallāso nacittavipallāso nadiṭṭhivipallāso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking not-self as not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asubhe, bhikkhave, asubhanti nasaññāvipallāso nacittavipallāso nadiṭṭhivipallāso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking ugliness as ugliness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro nasaññāvipallāsā nacittavipallāsā nadiṭṭhivipallāsāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four corrections of perception, mind, and view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anicce niccasaññino, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perceiving impermanence as permanence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhe ca sukhasaññino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">suffering as happiness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anattani ca attāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not-self as self, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asubhe subhasaññino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ugliness as beauty—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhihatā sattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sentient beings are ruined by wrong view, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khittacittā visaññino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">deranged, out of their mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te yogayuttā mārassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yoked by Māra’s yoke, these people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayogakkhemino janā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">find no sanctuary from the yoke. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattā gacchanti saṃsāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings continue to transmigrate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātimaraṇagāmino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with ongoing birth and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā ca buddhā lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when the Buddhas arise in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppajjanti pabhaṅkarā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">shedding radiance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te imaṃ dhammaṃ pakāsenti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they shine a light on this teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhūpasamagāminaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that leads to the stilling of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ sutvāna sappaññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a wise person hears them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sacittaṃ paccaladdhā te; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they get their mind back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccaṃ aniccato dakkhuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing impermanence as impermanence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhamaddakkhu dukkhato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">suffering as suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anattani anattāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not-self as not-self, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asubhaṃ asubhataddasuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ugliness as ugliness—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhisamādānā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">taking up right view, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaṃ dukkhaṃ upaccagun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve risen above all suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
