<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.103-103. Kumbhasutta  - 103. Pots </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.103. 103. Kumbhasutta  - 103. Pots </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Valāhakavagga  - 11. Clouds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, kumbhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four pots. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuccho pihito, pūro vivaṭo, tuccho vivaṭo, pūro pihito—</span></p>
<p class="p3">~Covered but hollow, ~uncovered but full, ~uncovered and hollow, and ~covered and full. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro kumbhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four pots. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, cattāro kumbhūpamā puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, these four people similar to pots are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuccho pihito, pūro vivaṭo, tuccho vivaṭo, pūro pihito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">~Covered but hollow, ~uncovered but full, ~uncovered and hollow, and ~covered and full. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo tuccho hoti pihito? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person covered but hollow? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa pāsādikaṃ hoti abhikkantaṃ paṭikkantaṃ ālokitaṃ vilokitaṃ samiñjitaṃ pasāritaṃ saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is impressive when going out and coming back, when looking ahead and aside, when bending and extending the limbs, and when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo tuccho hoti pihito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a person is covered but hollow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, kumbho tuccho pihito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That person is like a pot that’s covered but hollow, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo pūro hoti vivaṭo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person uncovered but full? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa na pāsādikaṃ hoti abhikkantaṃ paṭikkantaṃ ālokitaṃ vilokitaṃ samiñjitaṃ pasāritaṃ saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is not impressive … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo pūro hoti vivaṭo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, kumbho pūro vivaṭo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo tuccho hoti vivaṭo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person uncovered and hollow? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa na pāsādikaṃ hoti abhikkantaṃ paṭikkantaṃ ālokitaṃ vilokitaṃ samiñjitaṃ pasāritaṃ saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is not impressive … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor do they truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo tuccho hoti vivaṭo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, kumbho tuccho vivaṭo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, puggalo pūro hoti pihito? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a person covered and full? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa pāsādikaṃ hoti abhikkantaṃ paṭikkantaṃ ālokitaṃ vilokitaṃ samiñjitaṃ pasāritaṃ saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is impressive … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puggalo pūro hoti pihito. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi so, bhikkhave, kumbho pūro pihito; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathūpamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, imaṃ puggalaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro kumbhūpamā puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four people similar to pots are found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
