<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.159-159. Bhikkhunīsutta  - 159. Nun </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.159. 159. Bhikkhunīsutta  - 159. Nun </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Indriyavagga  - 16. Faculties </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ānando kosambiyaṃ viharati ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññatarā bhikkhunī aññataraṃ purisaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then a certain nun addressed a man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi tvaṃ, ambho purisa, yenayyo ānando tenupasaṅkama; upasaṅkamitvā mama vacanena ayyassa ānandassa pāde sirasā vanda: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, mister, go to Venerable Ānanda, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmā, bhante, bhikkhunī ābādhikinī dukkhitā bāḷhagilānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, the nun named so-and-so is sick, suffering, and gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ayyassa ānandassa pāde sirasā vandatī’ti. Evañca vadehi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">She bows with her head to your feet.’ And then say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhu kira, bhante, ayyo ānando yena bhikkhunupassayo yena sā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, please go to the nuns’ quarters to visit that nun out of compassion.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, ayye”ti kho so puriso tassā bhikkhuniyā paṭissutvā yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so puriso āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, ma’am,” that man replied. He did as the nun asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Itthannāmā, bhante, bhikkhunī ābādhikinī dukkhitā bāḷhagilānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā āyasmato ānandassa pāde sirasā vandati, evañca vadeti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhu kira, bhante, āyasmā ānando yena bhikkhunupassayo yena sā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi kho āyasmā ānando tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena bhikkhunupassayo yena sā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Ānanda robed up and went to the nuns’ quarters to visit that nun, taking his bowl and robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho sā bhikkhunī āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun saw Ānanda coming off in the distance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā sasīsaṃ pārupitvā mañcake nipajji. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She wrapped herself up from head to foot and laid down on her cot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena sā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Nisajja kho āyasmā ānando taṃ bhikkhuniṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to her, and sat down on the seat spread out. Then Ānanda said to the nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āhārasambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo āhāraṃ nissāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sister, this body is produced by food. Relying on food, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhāro pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give up food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāsambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo taṇhaṃ nissāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This body is produced by craving. Relying on craving, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhā pahātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give up craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mānasambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo mānaṃ nissāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This body is produced by conceit. Relying on conceit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māno pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give up conceit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunasambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This body is produced by sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methune ca setughāto vutto bhagavatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha spoke of breaking off everything to do with sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Āhārasambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo āhāraṃ nissāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This body is produced by food. Relying on food, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhāro pahātabbo’ti, iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give up food.’ This is what I said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">but why did I say it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhagini, bhikkhu paṭisaṅkhā yoniso āhāraṃ āhāreti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a mendicant who reflects properly on the food that they eat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘neva davāya na madāya na maṇḍanāya na vibhūsanāya, yāvadeva imassa kāyassa ṭhitiyā yāpanāya vihiṃsūparatiyā brahmacariyānuggahāya. Iti purāṇañca vedanaṃ paṭihaṅkhāmi, navañca vedanaṃ na uppādessāmi. Yātrā ca me bhavissati anavajjatā ca phāsuvihāro cā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will live blamelessly and at ease.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena āhāraṃ nissāya āhāraṃ pajahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time, relying on food, they give up food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Āhārasambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo āhāraṃ nissāya āhāro pahātabbo’t </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I said what I said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṇhāsambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo taṇhaṃ nissāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This body is produced by craving. Relying on craving, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhā pahātabbā’ti, iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give up craving.’ This is what I said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">but why did I say it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhagini, bhikkhu suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a mendicant who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmo kira bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kudāssu nāma ahampi āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharissāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Oh, when will I too realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena taṇhaṃ nissāya taṇhaṃ pajahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time, relying on craving, they give up craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṇhāsambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo taṇhaṃ nissāya taṇhā pahātabbā’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That's why I said what I said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mānasambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo mānaṃ nissāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This body is produced by conceit. Relying on conceit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māno pahātabbo’ti, iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give up conceit.’ This is what I said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">but why did I say it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhagini, bhikkhu suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a mendicant who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmo kira bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘so hi nāma āyasmā āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharissati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Well, that venerable can realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kimaṅgaṃ panāhan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why can’t I?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena mānaṃ nissāya mānaṃ pajahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time, relying on conceit, they give up conceit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mānasambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo, mānaṃ nissāya māno pahātabbo’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I said what I said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunasambhūto ayaṃ, bhagini, kāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This body is produced by sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methune ca setughāto vutto bhagavatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha spoke of breaking off everything to do with sex.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī mañcakā vuṭṭhahitvā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā āyasmato ānandassa pādesu sirasā nipatitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that nun rose from her cot, placed her robe over one shoulder, bowed with her head at Ānanda’s feet, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“accayo maṃ, bhante, accagamā, yathābālaṃ yathāmūḷhaṃ yathāakusalaṃ, yāhaṃ evamakāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to act in that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā me, bhante, ayyo ānando accayaṃ accayato paṭiggaṇhātu, āyatiṃ saṃvarāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I can restrain myself in future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha taṃ, bhagini, accayo accagamā, yathābālaṃ yathāmūḷhaṃ yathāakusalaṃ, yā tvaṃ evamakāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, sister, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of you to act in that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho tvaṃ, bhagini, accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ paṭikarosi, taṃ te mayaṃ paṭiggaṇhāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuddhi hesā, bhagini, ariyassa vinaye yo accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ paṭikaroti āyatiṃ saṃvaraṃ āpajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For it is growth in the training of the noble one to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
