<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.002-2. Cetanākaraṇīyasutta  - 2. Making a Wish </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.002. 2. Cetanākaraṇīyasutta  - 2. Making a Wish </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nissayavagga  - 1. Dependence </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sīlavato, bhikkhave, sīlasampannassa na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethical conduct, need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘avippaṭisāro me uppajjatū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I have no regrets!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ sīlavato sīlasampannassa avippaṭisāro uppajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural that an ethical person has no regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avippaṭisārissa, bhikkhave, na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you have no regrets you need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pāmojjaṃ me uppajjatū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I feel joy!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ avippaṭisārissa pāmojjaṃ uppajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural that joy springs up when you have no regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamuditassa, bhikkhave, na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you feel joy you need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pīti me uppajjatū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I experience rapture!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ pamuditassa pīti uppajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural that rapture arises when you’re joyful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pītimanassa, bhikkhave, na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When your mind is full of rapture you need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kāyo me passambhatū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May my body become tranquil!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ pītimanassa kāyo passambhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural that your body becomes tranquil when your mind is full of rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passaddhakāyassa, bhikkhave, na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When your body is tranquil you need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sukhaṃ vediyāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I feel bliss!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vediyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural to feel bliss when your body is tranquil. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhino, bhikkhave, na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you feel bliss you need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘cittaṃ me samādhiyatū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May my mind be immersed in samādhi!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural for the mind to become immersed in samādhi when you feel bliss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samāhitassa, bhikkhave, na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When your mind is immersed in samādhi you need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yathābhūtaṃ jānāmi passāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I truly know and see!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ samāhito yathābhūtaṃ jānāti passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural to truly know and see when your mind is immersed in samādhi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathābhūtaṃ, bhikkhave, jānato passato na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly know and see you need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nibbindāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I grow disillusioned!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ yathābhūtaṃ jānaṃ passaṃ nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural to grow disillusioned when you truly know and see. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbinnassa, bhikkhave, na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’re disillusioned you need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘virajjāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I become dispassionate!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ nibbinno virajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural to grow dispassionate when you’re disillusioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Virattassa, bhikkhave, na cetanāya karaṇīyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’re dispassionate you need not make a wish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ sacchikaromī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I realize the knowledge and vision of freedom!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammatā esā, bhikkhave, yaṃ viratto vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ sacchikaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s only natural to realize the knowledge and vision of freedom when you’re dispassionate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, virāgo vimuttiñāṇadassanattho vimuttiñāṇadassanānisaṃso, nibbidā virāgatthā virāgānisaṃsā, yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ nibbidatthaṃ nibbidānisaṃsaṃ, samādhi yathābhūtañāṇadassanattho yathābhūtañāṇadassanānisaṃso, sukhaṃ samādhatthaṃ samādhānisaṃsaṃ, passaddhi sukhatthā sukhānisaṃsā, pīti passaddhatthā passaddhānisaṃsā, pāmojjaṃ pītatthaṃ pītānisaṃsaṃ, avippaṭisāro pāmojjattho pāmojjānisaṃso, kusalāni sīlāni avippaṭisāratthāni avippaṭisārānisaṃsāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, mendicants, the knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose and benefit of dispassion. Dispassion is the purpose and benefit of disillusionment. Disillusionment is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. Truly knowing and seeing is the purpose and benefit of immersion. Immersion is the purpose and benefit of bliss. Bliss is the purpose and benefit of tranquility. Tranquility is the purpose and benefit of rapture. Rapture is the purpose and benefit of joy. Joy is the purpose and benefit of not having regrets. Not having regrets is the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, dhammā dhamme abhisandenti, dhammā dhamme paripūrenti apārā pāraṃ gamanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, mendicants, good qualities flow on and fill up from one to the other, for going from the near shore to the far shore.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
