<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.013-13. Nandiyasutta  - 13. With Nandiya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.013. 13. Nandiyasutta  - 13. With Nandiya </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Anussativagga  - 2. Recollection </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ nigrodhārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ vassāvāsaṃ upagantukāmo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha wanted to commence the rains residence at Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho nandiyo sakko: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavā kira sāvatthiyaṃ vassāvāsaṃ upagantukāmo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho nandiyassa sakkassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yannūnāhampi sāvatthiyaṃ vassāvāsaṃ upagaccheyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why don’t I also commence the rains residence at Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha kammantañceva adhiṭṭhahissāmi, bhagavantañca lacchāmi kālena kālaṃ dassanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There I can apply myself to my work and from time to time get to see the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ vassāvāsaṃ upagacchi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha commenced the rains residence in Sāvatthī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandiyopi kho sakko sāvatthiyaṃ vassāvāsaṃ upagacchi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and so did Nandiya. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha kammantañceva adhiṭṭhāsi, bhagavantañca labhi kālena kālaṃ dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There he applied himself to his work and from time to time got to see the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū bhagavato cīvarakammaṃ karonti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha, thinking that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“niṭṭhitacīvaro bhagavā temāsaccayena cārikaṃ pakkamissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when his robe was finished and the three months of the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho nandiyo sakko: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sambahulā kira bhikkhū bhagavato cīvarakammaṃ karonti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘niṭṭhitacīvaro bhagavā temāsaccayena cārikaṃ pakkamissatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho nandiyo sakko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho nandiyo sakko bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bhante: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have heard that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sambahulā kira bhikkhū bhagavato cīvarakammaṃ karonti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">several mendicants are making a robe for the Buddha, thinking that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niṭṭhitacīvaro bhagavā temāsaccayena cārikaṃ pakkamissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when his robe was finished and the three months of the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ no, bhante, nānāvihārehi viharataṃ kenassa vihārena vihātabban”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, we spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, nandiya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good Nandiya! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ kho, nandiya, tumhākaṃ patirūpaṃ kulaputtānaṃ, yaṃ tumhe tathāgataṃ upasaṅkamitvā puccheyyātha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate that gentlemen such as you come to me and ask: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tesaṃ no, bhante, nānāvihārehi viharataṃ kenassa vihārena vihātabban’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddho kho, nandiya, ārādhako hoti, no assaddho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The faithful succeed, not the faithless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlavā ārādhako hoti, no dussīlo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ethical succeed, not the unethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraddhavīriyo ārādhako hoti, no kusīto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The energetic succeed, not the lazy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upaṭṭhitassati ārādhako hoti, no muṭṭhassati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mindful succeed, not the unmindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samāhito ārādhako hoti, no asamāhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those with immersion succeed, not those without immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavā ārādhako hoti, no duppañño. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The wise succeed, not the witless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesu kho te, nandiya, chasu dhammesu patiṭṭhāya pañcasu dhammesu ajjhattaṃ sati upaṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’re grounded on these six things, go on to develop five further things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha tvaṃ, nandiya, tathāgataṃ anussareyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, you should recollect the Realized One: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi, satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho te, nandiya, tathāgataṃ ārabbha ajjhattaṃ sati upaṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ tvaṃ, nandiya, dhammaṃ anussareyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, you should recollect the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho te, nandiya, dhammaṃ ārabbha ajjhattaṃ sati upaṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ tvaṃ, nandiya, kalyāṇamitte anussareyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, you should recollect your good friends: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘lābhā vata me, suladdhaṃ vata me, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’m fortunate, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa me kalyāṇamittā anukampakā atthakāmā ovādakā anusāsakā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to have good friends who advise and instruct me out of kindness and compassion.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho te, nandiya, kalyāṇamitte ārabbha ajjhattaṃ sati upaṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on good friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ tvaṃ, nandiya, attano cāgaṃ anussareyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, you should recollect your own generosity: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘lābhā vata me, suladdhaṃ vata me, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’m so fortunate, so very fortunate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yohaṃ maccheramalapariyuṭṭhitāya pajāya vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasāmi muttacāgo payatapāṇi vossaggarato yācayogo dānasaṃvibhāgarato’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Among people with hearts full of the stain of stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho te, nandiya, cāgaṃ ārabbha ajjhattaṃ sati upaṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ tvaṃ, nandiya, devatā anussareyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, you should recollect the deities: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yā devatā atikkammeva kabaḷīkārāhārabhakkhānaṃ devatānaṃ sahabyataṃ aññataraṃ manomayaṃ kāyaṃ upapannā, tā karaṇīyaṃ attano na samanupassanti katassa vā paticayaṃ’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are deities who, surpassing the company of deities that consume solid food, are reborn in a certain host of mind-made deities. They don’t see in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, nandiya, bhikkhu asamayavimutto karaṇīyaṃ attano na samanupassati katassa vā paticayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An irreversibly freed mendicant doesn’t see in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, nandiya, yā tā devatā atikkammeva kabaḷīkārāhārabhakkhānaṃ devatānaṃ sahabyataṃ aññataraṃ manomayaṃ kāyaṃ upapannā, tā karaṇīyaṃ attano na samanupassanti katassa vā paticayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, Nandiya, there are deities who, surpassing the company of deities that consume solid food, are reborn in a certain host of mind-made deities. They don’t see in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho te, nandiya, devatā ārabbha ajjhattaṃ sati upaṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on the deities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, nandiya, ekādasahi dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako pajahateva pāpake akusale dhamme, na upādiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple who has these eleven qualities gives up bad, unskillful qualities and doesn’t cling to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, nandiya, kumbho nikkujjo vamateva udakaṃ, no vantaṃ paccāvamati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like when a pot full of water is tipped over, so the water drains out and doesn’t go back in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi vā pana, nandiya, sukkhe tiṇadāye aggi mutto ḍahaññeva gacchati, no daḍḍhaṃ paccudāvattati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was an uncontrolled fire. It advances burning up dry woodlands and doesn’t go back over what it has burned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, nandiya, imehi ekādasahi dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako pajahateva pāpake akusale dhamme, na upādiyatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a noble disciple who has these eleven qualities gives up bad, unskillful qualities and doesn’t cling to them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
