<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.119-119. Paṭhamapaccorohaṇīsutta  - 119. The Ceremony of Descent (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.119. 119. Paṭhamapaccorohaṇīsutta  - 119. The Ceremony of Descent (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Paccorohaṇivagga  - 12. The Ceremony of Descent </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena jāṇussoṇi brāhmaṇo tadahuposathe sīsaṃnhāto navaṃ khomayugaṃ nivattho allakusamuṭṭhiṃ ādāya bhagavato avidūre ekamantaṃ ṭhito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time it was the sabbath. The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi had bathed his head and dressed in a new pair of linen robes. Holding a handful of fresh grass, he stood to one side not far from the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā jāṇussoṇiṃ brāhmaṇaṃ tadahuposathe sīsaṃnhātaṃ navaṃ khomayugaṃ nivatthaṃ allakusamuṭṭhiṃ ādāya ekamantaṃ ṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha saw him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna jāṇussoṇiṃ brāhmaṇaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, tadahuposathe sīsaṃnhāto navaṃ khomayugaṃ nivattho allakusamuṭṭhiṃ ādāya ekamantaṃ ṭhito? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, why have you bathed your head and dressed in a new pair of linen robes? Why are you standing to one side holding a handful of fresh grass? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ nvajja brāhmaṇakulassā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s going on today with the brahmin clan?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paccorohaṇī, bho gotama, ajja brāhmaṇakulassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, today is the ceremony of descent for the brahmin clan.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana, brāhmaṇa, brāhmaṇānaṃ paccorohaṇī hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how do the brahmins observe the ceremony of descent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bho gotama, brāhmaṇā tadahuposathe sīsaṃnhātā navaṃ khomayugaṃ nivatthā allena gomayena pathaviṃ opuñjitvā haritehi kusehi pattharitvā antarā ca velaṃ antarā ca agyāgāraṃ seyyaṃ kappenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, Master Gotama, on the sabbath the brahmins bathe their heads and dress in a new pair of linen robes. They make a heap of fresh cow dung and spread it with green grass. Then they make their beds between the boundary and the fire chamber. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ rattiṃ tikkhattuṃ paccuṭṭhāya pañjalikā aggiṃ namassanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">That night they rise three times and worship the fire with joined palms: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paccorohāma bhavantaṃ, paccorohāma bhavantan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We descend, lord! We descend, lord!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahukena ca sappitelanavanītena aggiṃ santappenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they serve the fire with abundant ghee, oil, and butter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā ca rattiyā accayena paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena brāhmaṇe santappenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when the night has passed they serve the brahmins with a variety of delicious foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ, bho gotama, brāhmaṇānaṃ paccorohaṇī hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the brahmins observe the ceremony of descent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññathā kho, brāhmaṇa, brāhmaṇānaṃ paccorohaṇī hoti, aññathā ca pana ariyassa vinaye paccorohaṇī hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is quite different from that observed in the training of the noble one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana, bho gotama, ariyassa vinaye paccorohaṇī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Master Gotama, how is the ceremony of descent observed in the training of the noble one? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu me bhavaṃ gotamo tathā dhammaṃ desetu yathā ariyassa vinaye paccorohaṇī hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Master Gotama, please teach me this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, brāhmaṇa, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, brahmin, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”ti kho jāṇussoṇi brāhmaṇo bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes sir,” Jāṇussoṇi replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, brāhmaṇa, ariyasāvako iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a noble disciple reflects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘micchādiṭṭhiyā kho pāpako vipāko </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong view has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchādiṭṭhiṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong view, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchādiṭṭhiyā paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… ‘Micchāsaṅkappassa kho pāpako vipāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong thought has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchāsaṅkappaṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāsaṅkappā paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… ‘Micchāvācāya kho pāpako vipāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong speech has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchāvācaṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong speech, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāvācāya paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… ‘Micchākammantassa kho pāpako vipāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong action has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchākammantaṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong action, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchākammantā paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… ‘Micchāājīvassa kho pāpako vipāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong livelihood has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchāājīvaṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong livelihood, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāājīvā paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… ‘Micchāvāyāmassa kho pāpako vipāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong effort has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchāvāyāmaṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong effort, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāvāyāmā paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… ‘Micchāsatiyā kho pāpako vipāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong mindfulness has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchāsatiṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong mindfulness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāsatiyā paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… ‘Micchāsamādhissa kho pāpako vipāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong immersion has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchāsamādhiṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāsamādhimhā paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… ‘Micchāñāṇassa kho pāpako vipāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong knowledge has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchāñāṇaṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong knowledge, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāñāṇamhā paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… ‘Micchāvimuttiyā kho pāpako vipāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wrong freedom has a bad result </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe ceva dhamme abhisamparāyañcā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in both this life and the next.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya micchāvimuttiṃ pajahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they give up wrong freedom, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāvimuttiyā paccorohati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they descend from wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, ariyassa vinaye paccorohaṇī hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the ceremony of descent in the training of the noble one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññathā, bho gotama, brāhmaṇānaṃ paccorohaṇī, aññathā ca pana ariyassa vinaye paccorohaṇī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is quite different from that observed in the training of the noble one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imissā ca, bho gotama, ariyassa vinaye paccorohaṇiyā brāhmaṇānaṃ paccorohaṇī kalaṃ nāgghati soḷasiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And, Master Gotama, the ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of the ceremony of descent observed in the training of the noble one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, Master Gotama! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
