<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.098-98. Therasutta  - 98. A Senior Mendicant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.098. 98. Therasutta  - 98. A Senior Mendicant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Upālivagga  - 10. With Upāli </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato thero bhikkhu yassaṃ yassaṃ disāyaṃ viharati, phāsuyeva viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a senior mendicant with ten qualities lives comfortably in whatever region they live. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thero hoti rattaññū cirapabbajito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are senior and have long gone forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlavā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re ethical, restrained in the code of conduct, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu, bahussuto hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdho, ubhayāni kho panassa pātimokkhāni vitthārena svāgatāni honti suvibhattāni suppavattīni suvinicchitāni suttaso anubyañjanaso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well judged in both the rules and accompanying material. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhikaraṇasamuppādavūpasamakusalo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re skilled in raising and settling disciplinary issues. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammakāmo hoti piyasamudāhāro abhidhamme abhivinaye uḷārapāmojjo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They love the teachings and are a delight to converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santuṭṭho hoti itarītaracīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re content with any kind of robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāsādiko hoti abhikkantapaṭikkante susaṃvuto antaraghare nisajjāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They look impressive when going out and coming back, and are well restrained when sitting in an inhabited area. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsavānañca khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato thero bhikkhu yassaṃ yassaṃ disāyaṃ viharati, phāsuyeva viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A senior mendicant with these ten qualities lives comfortably in whatever region they live.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
