<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.102-102. Bojjhaṅgasutta  - 102. Awakening Factors </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.102. 102. Bojjhaṅgasutta  - 102. Awakening Factors </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Samaṇasaññāvagga  - 11. Perceptions for Ascetics </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, bhikkhave, bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā tisso vijjā paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated they fulfill three knowledges. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo, dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgo, vīriyasambojjhaṅgo, pītisambojjhaṅgo, passaddhisambojjhaṅgo, samādhisambojjhaṅgo, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā tisso vijjā paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When these seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated they fulfill three knowledges. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant recollects their many kinds of past lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo tissopi jātiyo … pe … iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena … pe … yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human, they understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsavānaṃ khayā … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā imā tisso vijjā paripūrentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When those seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated they fulfill these three knowledges.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
