<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.014-14. Cetokhilasutta  - 14. Emotional Barrenness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.014. 14. Cetokhilasutta  - 14. Emotional Barrenness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nāthavagga  - 2. A Protector </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassa kassaci, bhikkhave, bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā pañca cetokhilā appahīnā pañca cetasovinibandhā asamucchinnā, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati hāniyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no vuddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a monk or nun who has not given up five kinds of emotional barrenness and has not cut off five emotional shackles can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamassa pañca cetokhilā appahīnā honti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five kinds of emotional barrenness they haven’t given up? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satthari kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They’re uncertain, undecided, and lacking confidence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satthari kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati, tassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, evamassāyaṃ paṭhamo cetokhilo appahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first kind of emotional barrenness they haven’t given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhamme kaṅkhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe kaṅkhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhāya kaṅkhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the training … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabrahmacārīsu kupito hoti anattamano āhatacitto khilajāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant is angry and upset with their spiritual companions, resentful and closed off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sabrahmacārīsu kupito hoti anattamano āhatacitto khilajāto, tassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, evamassāyaṃ pañcamo cetokhilo appahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth kind of emotional barrenness they haven’t given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa pañca cetokhilā appahīnā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five kinds of emotional barrenness they haven’t given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamassa pañca cetasovinibandhā asamucchinnā honti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five emotional shackles they haven’t cut off? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāmesu avītarāgo hoti avigatacchando avigatapemo avigatapipāso avigatapariḷāho avigatataṇho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant isn’t free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāmesu avītarāgo hoti avigatacchando avigatapemo avigatapipāso avigatapariḷāho avigatataṇho, tassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, evamassāyaṃ paṭhamo cetasovinibandho asamucchinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first emotional shackle they haven’t cut off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye avītarāgo hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant isn’t free of greed for the body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpe avītarāgo hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not free of greed for form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvadatthaṃ udarāvadehakaṃ bhuñjitvā seyyasukhaṃ passasukhaṃ middhasukhaṃ anuyutto viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat as much as they like until their belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying, and drowsing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññataraṃ devanikāyaṃ paṇidhāya brahmacariyaṃ carati: ‘imināhaṃ sīlena vā vatena vā tapena vā brahmacariyena vā devo vā bhavissāmi devaññataro vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live the spiritual life wishing to be reborn in one of the orders of gods: ‘By this precept or observance or mortification or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu aññataraṃ devanikāyaṃ paṇidhāya brahmacariyaṃ carati: ‘imināhaṃ sīlena vā vatena vā tapena vā brahmacariyena vā devo vā bhavissāmi devaññataro vā’ti, tassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, evamassāyaṃ pañcamo cetasovinibandho asamucchinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth emotional shackle they haven’t cut off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa pañca cetasovinibandhā asamucchinnā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five emotional shackles they haven’t cut off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, bhikkhave, bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā ime pañca cetokhilā appahīnā ime pañca cetasovinibandhā asamucchinnā, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati hāniyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no vuddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk or nun who has not given up these five kinds of emotional barrenness and has not cut off these five emotional shackles can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kāḷapakkhe candassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, hāyateva vaṇṇena hāyati maṇḍalena hāyati ābhāya hāyati ārohapariṇāhena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like the moon in the waning fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yassa kassaci bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā ime pañca cetokhilā appahīnā ime pañca cetasovinibandhā asamucchinnā, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati hāniyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no vuddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, monk or nun who has not given up these five kinds of emotional barrenness and has not cut off these five emotional shackles can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, bhikkhave, bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā pañca cetokhilā pahīnā pañca cetasovinibandhā susamucchinnā, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk or nun who has given up five kinds of emotional barrenness and has cut off five emotional shackles can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamassa pañca cetokhilā pahīnā honti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five kinds of emotional barrenness they’ve given up? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satthari na kaṅkhati na vicikicchati, adhimuccati sampasīdati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant has no doubts about the Teacher. They’re not uncertain, undecided, or lacking confidence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satthari na kaṅkhati na vicikicchati adhimuccati sampasīdati, tassa cittaṃ namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, evamassāyaṃ paṭhamo cetokhilo pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first kind of emotional barrenness they’ve given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhamme na kaṅkhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant has no doubts about the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe na kaṅkhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhāya na kaṅkhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the training … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabrahmacārīsu na kupito hoti attamano na āhatacitto na khilajāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant is not angry and upset with their spiritual companions, not resentful or closed off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sabrahmacārīsu na kupito hoti attamano na āhatacitto na khilajāto, tassa cittaṃ namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, evamassāyaṃ pañcamo cetokhilo pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth kind of emotional barrenness they’ve given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa pañca cetokhilā pahīnā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five kinds of emotional barrenness they’ve given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamassa pañca cetasovinibandhā susamucchinnā honti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five emotional shackles they’ve cut off? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāmesu vītarāgo hoti vigatacchando vigatapemo vigatapipāso vigatapariḷāho vigatataṇho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant is rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāmesu vītarāgo hoti vigatacchando vigatapemo vigatapipāso vigatapariḷāho vigatataṇho, tassa cittaṃ namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, evamassāyaṃ paṭhamo cetasovinibandho susamucchinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first emotional shackle they’ve cut off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye vītarāgo hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant is rid of greed for the body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpe vītarāgo hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re rid of greed for form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na yāvadatthaṃ udarāvadehakaṃ bhuñjitvā seyyasukhaṃ passasukhaṃ middhasukhaṃ anuyutto viharati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t eat as much as they like until their belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying, and drowsing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññataraṃ devanikāyaṃ paṇidhāya brahmacariyaṃ carati: ‘imināhaṃ sīlena vā vatena vā tapena vā brahmacariyena vā devo vā bhavissāmi devaññataro vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t live the spiritual life wishing to be reborn in one of the orders of gods: ‘By this precept or observance or mortification or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na aññataraṃ devanikāyaṃ paṇidhāya … pe … devaññataro vāti, tassa cittaṃ namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, evamassāyaṃ pañcamo cetasovinibandho susamucchinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth emotional shackle they’ve cut off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa pañca cetasovinibandhā susamucchinnā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five emotional shackles they’ve cut off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, bhikkhave, bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā ime pañca cetokhilā pahīnā ime pañca cetasovinibandhā susamucchinnā, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk or nun who has given up these five kinds of emotional barrenness and has cut off these five emotional shackles can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, juṇhapakkhe candassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, vaḍḍhateva vaṇṇena vaḍḍhati maṇḍalena vaḍḍhati ābhāya vaḍḍhati ārohapariṇāhena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like the moon in the waxing fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yassa kassaci bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā ime pañca cetokhilā pahīnā ime pañca cetasovinibandhā susamucchinnā, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no parihānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a monk or nun who has given up these five kinds of emotional barrenness and has cut off these five emotional shackles can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
