<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.103-103. Micchattasutta  - 103. The Wrong Way </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.103. 103. Micchattasutta  - 103. The Wrong Way </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Samaṇasaññāvagga  - 11. Perceptions for Ascetics </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Micchattaṃ, bhikkhave, āgamma virādhanā hoti, no ārādhanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, relying on the wrong way leads to failure, not success. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, micchattaṃ āgamma virādhanā hoti, no ārādhanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does relying on the wrong way lead to failure, not success? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo pahoti, micchāsaṅkappassa micchāvācā pahoti, micchāvācassa micchākammanto pahoti, micchākammantassa micchāājīvo pahoti, micchāājīvassa micchāvāyāmo pahoti, micchāvāyāmassa micchāsati pahoti, micchāsatissa micchāsamādhi pahoti, micchāsamādhissa micchāñāṇaṃ pahoti, micchāñāṇissa micchāvimutti pahoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view gives rise to wrong thought. Wrong thought gives rise to wrong speech. Wrong speech gives rise to wrong action. Wrong action gives rise to wrong livelihood. Wrong livelihood gives rise to wrong effort. Wrong effort gives rise to wrong mindfulness. Wrong mindfulness gives rise to wrong immersion. Wrong immersion gives rise to wrong knowledge. Wrong knowledge gives rise to wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, micchattaṃ āgamma virādhanā hoti, no ārādhanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how relying on the wrong way leads to failure, not success. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammattaṃ, bhikkhave, āgamma ārādhanā hoti, no virādhanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Relying on the right way leads to success, not failure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, sammattaṃ āgamma ārādhanā hoti, no virādhanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does relying on the right way lead to success, not failure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo pahoti, sammāsaṅkappassa sammāvācā pahoti, sammāvācassa sammākammanto pahoti, sammākammantassa sammāājīvo pahoti, sammāājīvassa sammāvāyāmo pahoti, sammāvāyāmassa sammāsati pahoti, sammāsatissa sammāsamādhi pahoti, sammāsamādhissa sammāñāṇaṃ pahoti, sammāñāṇissa sammāvimutti pahoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives rise to right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right action gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to right effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right mindfulness gives rise to right immersion. Right immersion gives rise to right knowledge. Right knowledge gives rise to right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, sammattaṃ āgamma ārādhanā hoti, no virādhanā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how relying on the right way leads to success, not failure.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
