<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.171-171. Paṭhamaadhammasutta  - 171. Bad Principles (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.171. 171. Paṭhamaadhammasutta  - 171. Bad Principles (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Jāṇussoṇivagga  - 17. With Jāṇussoṇi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo anattho ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should know bad principles with bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammo ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā anatthañca, dhammañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, adhammo ca anattho ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are bad principles with bad results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipāto, adinnādānaṃ, kāmesumicchācāro, musāvādo, pisuṇā vācā, pharusā vācā, samphappalāpo, abhijjhā, byāpādo, micchādiṭṭhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, adhammo ca anattho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called bad principles with bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, dhammo ca attho ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are good principles with good results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātā veramaṇī, adinnādānā veramaṇī, kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇī, musāvādā veramaṇī, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī, samphappalāpā veramaṇī, anabhijjhā, abyāpādo, sammādiṭṭhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; avoiding speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; contentment, good will, and right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhammo ca attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo anattho ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You should know bad principles with bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammo ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā anatthañca, dhammañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabban’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
