<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.025-25. Kasiṇasutta  - 25. Meditation on Universals </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.025. 25. Kasiṇasutta  - 25. Meditation on Universals </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Mahāvagga  - 3. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasayimāni, bhikkhave, kasiṇāyatanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these ten universal dimensions of meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathavīkasiṇameko sañjānāti uddhaṃ adho tiriyaṃ advayaṃ appamāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above, below, across, non-dual and limitless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpokasiṇameko sañjānāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They perceive the meditation on universal water … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tejokasiṇameko sañjānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the meditation on universal fire … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāyokasiṇameko sañjānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the meditation on universal air … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nīlakasiṇameko sañjānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the meditation on universal blue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītakasiṇameko sañjānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the meditation on universal yellow … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lohitakasiṇameko sañjānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the meditation on universal red … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">odātakasiṇameko sañjānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the meditation on universal white … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ākāsakasiṇameko sañjānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the meditation on universal space … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇakasiṇameko sañjānāti uddhaṃ adho tiriyaṃ advayaṃ appamāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They perceive the meditation on universal consciousness above, below, across, non-dual and limitless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dasa kasiṇāyatanānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten universal dimensions of meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
