<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.144-144. Dukkhavipākasutta  - 144. Result in Suffering </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.144. 144. Dukkhavipākasutta  - 144. Result in Suffering </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Sādhuvagga  - 14. Good </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhavipākañca vo, bhikkhave, dhammaṃ desessāmi sukhavipākañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I will teach you the principle that results in suffering and that which results in happiness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamo ca, bhikkhave, dukkhavipāko dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what principle results in suffering? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhi … pe … micchāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhavipāko dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the principle that results in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sukhavipāko dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what principle results in happiness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sukhavipāko dhammo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the principle that results in happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhuvaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
