<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.143-143. Dukkhudrayasutta  - 143. With Suffering as Outcome </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.143. 143. Dukkhudrayasutta  - 143. With Suffering as Outcome </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Sādhuvagga  - 14. Good </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhudrayañca vo, bhikkhave, dhammaṃ desessāmi sukhudrayañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I will teach you the principle that has suffering as outcome, and that which has happiness as outcome. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamo ca, bhikkhave, dukkhudrayo dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the principle whose outcome is suffering? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhi … pe … micchāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhudrayo dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the principle whose outcome is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sukhudrayo dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the principle whose outcome is happiness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sukhudrayo dhammo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the principle whose outcome is happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
