<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.011-11. Senāsanasutta  - 11. Lodgings </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.011. 11. Senāsanasutta  - 11. Lodgings </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nāthavagga  - 2. A Protector </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcaṅgasamannāgato, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgasamannāgataṃ senāsanaṃ sevamāno bhajamāno nacirasseva āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with five factors, using and frequenting lodgings with five factors, will soon realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgasamannāgato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant have five factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddho hoti; saddahati tathāgatassa bodhiṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā … pe … bhagavā’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appābādho hoti appātaṅko, samavepākiniyā gahaṇiyā samannāgato nātisītāya nāccuṇhāya majjhimāya padhānakkhamāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṭho hoti amāyāvī, yathābhūtaṃ attānaṃ āvikattā satthari vā viññūsu vā sabrahmacārīsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not devious or deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraddhavīriyo viharati, akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya; thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavā hoti, udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgasamannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has five factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, senāsanaṃ pañcaṅgasamannāgataṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a lodging have five factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, senāsanaṃ nātidūraṃ hoti nāccāsannaṃ gamanāgamanasampannaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a lodging is neither too far nor too near, but convenient for coming and going. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">divā appākiṇṇaṃ rattiṃ appasaddaṃ appanigghosaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not bothered by people by day, and at night it’s quiet and still. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appaḍaṃsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s little disturbance from flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ kho pana senāsane viharantassa appakasirena uppajjanti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">While staying in that lodging the necessities of life—robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick—are easy to come by. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ kho pana senāsane therā bhikkhū viharanti bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And in that lodging there are several senior mendicants who are very learned, knowledgeable in the scriptures, who have memorized the teachings, the texts on monastic training, and the outlines. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te kālena kālaṃ upasaṅkamitvā paripucchati paripañhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">From time to time they go up to those mendicants and ask them questions: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ, bhante, kathaṃ, imassa ko attho’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa te āyasmanto avivaṭañceva vivaranti anuttānīkatañca uttāniṃ karonti anekavihitesu ca kaṅkhāṭhāniyesu dhammesu kaṅkhaṃ paṭivinodenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, senāsanaṃ pañcaṅgasamannāgataṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a lodging has five factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcaṅgasamannāgato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgasamannāgataṃ senāsanaṃ sevamāno bhajamāno nacirasseva āsavānaṃ khayā … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with five factors, using and frequenting lodgings with five factors, will soon realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
