<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.023-23. Kāyasutta  - 23. Body </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.023. 23. Kāyasutta  - 23. Body </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Mahāvagga  - 3. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā kāyena pahātabbā, no vācāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are things that should be given up by the body, not by speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā vācāya pahātabbā, no kāyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that should be given up by speech, not by the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā kāyena pahātabbā, no vācāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be given up by the body, not by speech? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu akusalaṃ āpanno hoti kiñci desaṃ kāyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has committed a certain unskillful offense by way of body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ anuvicca viññū sabrahmacārī evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">After examination, sensible spiritual companions say this to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘āyasmā kho akusalaṃ āpanno kiñci desaṃ kāyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerable, you’ve committed a certain unskillful offense by way of body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu vatāyasmā kāyaduccaritaṃ pahāya kāyasucaritaṃ bhāvetū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good bodily conduct.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anuvicca viññūhi sabrahmacārīhi vuccamāno kāyaduccaritaṃ pahāya kāyasucaritaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When spoken to by their sensible spiritual companions they give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good bodily conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā kāyena pahātabbā, no vācāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the things that should be given up by the body, not by speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā vācāya pahātabbā, no kāyena? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be given up by speech, not by the body? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu akusalaṃ āpanno hoti kiñci desaṃ vācāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has committed a certain unskillful offense by way of speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ anuvicca viññū sabrahmacārī evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">After examination, sensible spiritual companions say this to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘āyasmā kho akusalaṃ āpanno kiñci desaṃ vācāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerable, you’ve committed a certain unskillful offense by way of speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu vatāyasmā vacīduccaritaṃ pahāya vacīsucaritaṃ bhāvetū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please give up that bad verbal conduct and develop good verbal conduct.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anuvicca viññūhi sabrahmacārīhi vuccamāno vacīduccaritaṃ pahāya vacīsucaritaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When spoken to by their sensible spiritual companions they give up that bad verbal conduct and develop good verbal conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā vācāya pahātabbā, no kāyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the things that should be given up by speech, not by the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lobho, bhikkhave, neva kāyena pahātabbo no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Doso, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">hate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">moho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">delusion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">anger … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanāho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">hostility … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">offensiveness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paḷāso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contempt … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">macchariyaṃ, bhikkhave, neva kāyena pahātabbaṃ no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and stinginess are things that should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāpikā, bhikkhave, issā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nasty jealousy should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, pāpikā issā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is nasty jealousy? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ijjhati gahapatissa vā gahapatiputtassa vā dhanena vā dhaññena vā rajatena vā jātarūpena vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a householder or their child is prospering in money, grain, silver, or gold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrāññatarassa dāsassa vā upavāsassa vā evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a bondservant or dependent thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatimassa gahapatissa vā gahapatiputtassa vā na ijjheyya dhanena vā dhaññena vā rajatena vā jātarūpena vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Oh, may that householder or their child not prosper in money, grain, silver, or gold!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇo vā pana brāhmaṇo vā lābhī hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or an ascetic or brahmin receives robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrāññatarassa samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And some other ascetic or brahmin thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vata ayamāyasmā na lābhī assa cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Oh, may that ascetic or brahmin not receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpikā issā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called nasty jealousy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāpikā, bhikkhave, icchā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Corrupt wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, pāpikā icchā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are corrupt wishes? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco assaddho samāno ‘saddhoti maṃ jāneyyun’ti icchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a faithless person wishes to be known as faithful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dussīlo samāno ‘sīlavāti maṃ jāneyyun’ti icchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An unethical person wishes to be known as ethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appassuto samāno ‘bahussutoti maṃ jāneyyun’ti icchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An uneducated person wishes to be known as learned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgaṇikārāmo samāno ‘pavivittoti maṃ jāneyyun’ti icchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lover of company wishes to be known as secluded. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kusīto samāno ‘āraddhavīriyoti maṃ jāneyyun’ti icchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lazy person wishes to be known as energetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muṭṭhassati samāno ‘upaṭṭhitassatīti maṃ jāneyyun’ti icchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An unmindful person wishes to be known as mindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asamāhito samāno ‘samāhitoti maṃ jāneyyun’ti icchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person without immersion wishes to be known as having immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duppañño samāno ‘paññavāti maṃ jāneyyun’ti icchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A witless person wishes to be known as wise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akhīṇāsavo samāno ‘khīṇāsavoti maṃ jāneyyun’ti icchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who has not ended the defilements wishes to be known as having ended the defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpikā icchā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called corrupt wishes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Corrupt wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṃ lobho abhibhuyya iriyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose that greed masters that mendicant and keeps going. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">doso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or that hate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">moho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">delusion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">anger … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanāho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">hostility … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">offensiveness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paḷāso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contempt … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">macchariyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">stinginess … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpikā issā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nasty jealousy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpikā icchā abhibhuyya iriyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or corrupt wishes master them and keep going. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamassa veditabbo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should know of them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāyamāyasmā tathā pajānāti yathā pajānato lobho na hoti, tathāhimaṃ āyasmantaṃ lobho abhibhuyya iriyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This venerable does not have the understanding that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāyamāyasmā tathā pajānāti yathā pajānato doso na hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t have the understanding that would eliminate hate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">moho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">delusion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">anger … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanāho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">hostility … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">offensiveness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paḷāso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contempt … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">macchariyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">stinginess … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpikā issā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nasty jealousy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpikā icchā na hoti, tathāhimaṃ āyasmantaṃ pāpikā icchā abhibhuyya iriyatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep going.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṃ lobho nābhibhuyya iriyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose that greed does not master that mendicant and keep going. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">doso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or that hate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">moho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">delusion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">anger … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanāho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">hostility … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">offensiveness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paḷāso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contempt … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">macchariyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">stinginess … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpikā issā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nasty jealousy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpikā icchā nābhibhuyya iriyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">or corrupt wishes don’t master that mendicant and keep going. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so evamassa veditabbo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should know of them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tathā ayamāyasmā pajānāti yathā pajānato lobho na hoti, tathāhimaṃ āyasmantaṃ lobho nābhibhuyya iriyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This venerable has the understanding that eliminates greed, so greed doesn’t master them and keep going. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathā ayamāyasmā pajānāti yathā pajānato doso na hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have the understanding that eliminates hate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">moho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">delusion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">anger … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanāho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">hostility … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">offensiveness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paḷāso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contempt … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">macchariyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">stinginess … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpikā issā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nasty jealousy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpikā icchā na hoti, tathāhimaṃ āyasmantaṃ pāpikā icchā nābhibhuyya iriyatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don’t master them and keep going.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
