<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.007-7. Sāriputtasutta  - 7. Sāriputta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.007. 7. Sāriputtasutta  - 7. Sāriputta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ānisaṃsavagga  - 1. Benefits </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa, na āpasmiṃ āposaññī assa, na tejasmiṃ tejosaññī assa, na vāyasmiṃ vāyosaññī assa, na ākāsānañcāyatane ākāsānañcāyatanasaññī assa, na viññāṇañcāyatane viññāṇañcāyatanasaññī assa, na ākiñcaññāyatane ākiñcaññāyatanasaññī assa, na nevasaññānāsaññāyatane nevasaññānāsaññāyatanasaññī assa, na idhaloke idhalokasaññī assa, na paraloke paralokasaññī assa; saññī ca pana assā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Could it be, reverend Sāriputta, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this? They wouldn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. And they wouldn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet they would still perceive.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā, āvuso ānanda, bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa … pe … na paraloke paralokasaññī assa; saññī ca pana assā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It could be, Reverend Ānanda.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana, āvuso sāriputta, siyā bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa … pe … saññī ca pana assā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how could this be?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ekamidāhaṃ, āvuso ānanda, samayaṃ idheva sāvatthiyaṃ viharāmi andhavanasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Ānanda, one time I was staying right here at Sāvatthī in the Dark Forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāhaṃ tathārūpaṃ samādhiṃ samāpajjiṃ yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī ahosiṃ, na āpasmiṃ āposaññī ahosiṃ, na tejasmiṃ tejosaññī ahosiṃ, na vāyasmiṃ vāyosaññī ahosiṃ, na ākāsānañcāyatane ākāsānañcāyatanasaññī ahosiṃ, na viññāṇañcāyatane viññāṇañcāyatanasaññī ahosiṃ, na ākiñcaññāyatane ākiñcaññāyatanasaññī ahosiṃ, na nevasaññānāsaññāyatane nevasaññānāsaññāyatanasaññī ahosiṃ, na idhaloke idhalokasaññī ahosiṃ, na paraloke paralokasaññī ahosiṃ; saññī ca pana ahosin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There I gained a state of immersion like this. I didn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And I didn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. And I didn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet I still perceived.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃsaññī panāyasmā sāriputto tasmiṃ samaye ahosī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But at that time what did Reverend Sāriputta perceive?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Bhavanirodho nibbānaṃ bhavanirodho nibbānan’ti kho me, āvuso, aññāva saññā uppajjati aññāva saññā nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“One perception arose in me and another perception ceased: ‘The cessation of continued existence is extinguishment. The cessation of continued existence is extinguishment.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, āvuso, sakalikaggissa jhāyamānassa aññāva acci uppajjati aññāva acci nirujjhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a burning pile of twigs. One flame would arise and another would cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, āvuso, ‘bhavanirodho nibbānaṃ bhavanirodho nibbānan’ti aññāva saññā uppajjati aññāva saññā nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, one perception arose in me and another perception ceased: ‘The cessation of continued existence is extinguishment. The cessation of continued existence is extinguishment.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Bhavanirodho nibbānan’ti saññī ca panāhaṃ, āvuso, tasmiṃ samaye ahosin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time I perceived that the cessation of continued existence is extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
