<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.019-19. Paṭhamaariyāvāsasutta  - 19. Abodes of the Noble Ones (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.019. 19. Paṭhamaariyāvāsasutta  - 19. Abodes of the Noble Ones (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nāthavagga  - 2. A Protector </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasayime, bhikkhave, ariyāvāsā, ye ariyā āvasiṃsu vā āvasanti vā āvasissanti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these ten noble abodes in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgavippahīno hoti, chaḷaṅgasamannāgato, ekārakkho, caturāpasseno, paṇunnapaccekasacco, samavayasaṭṭhesano, anāvilasaṅkappo, passaddhakāyasaṅkhāro, suvimuttacitto, suvimuttapañño. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant has given up five factors, is endowed with six factors, has a single guard, has four supports, has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has pure intentions, has stilled the physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa ariyāvāsā, ye ariyā āvasiṃsu vā āvasanti vā āvasissanti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten noble abodes in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
