<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.065-65. Paṭhamasukhasutta  - 65. Happiness (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.065. 65. Paṭhamasukhasutta  - 65. Happiness (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Yamakavagga  - 7. Pairs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā sāriputto magadhesu viharati nālakagāmake. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying in the land of the Magadhans near the little village of Nālaka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāmaṇḍakāni paribbājako yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Sāmaṇḍakāni went up to Venerable Sāriputta and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho sāmaṇḍakāni paribbājako āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, Sāmaṇḍakāni sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, sukhaṃ, kiṃ dukkhan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, what is happiness and what is suffering?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhinibbatti kho, āvuso, dukkhā, anabhinibbatti sukhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rebirth is suffering, reverend, no rebirth is happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinibbattiyā, āvuso, sati idaṃ dukkhaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is rebirth, you can expect this kind of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sītaṃ uṇhaṃ jighacchā pipāsā uccāro passāvo aggisamphasso daṇḍasamphasso satthasamphasso ñātīpi mittāpi saṅgamma samāgamma rosenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Cold, heat, hunger, thirst, defecation, and urination. Contact with fire, clubs, and knives. And relatives and friends get together and annoy you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinibbattiyā, āvuso, sati idaṃ dukkhaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is rebirth, this is the kind of suffering you can expect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anabhinibbattiyā, āvuso, sati idaṃ sukhaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no rebirth, you can expect this kind of happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sītaṃ na uṇhaṃ na jighacchā na pipāsā na uccāro na passāvo na aggisamphasso na daṇḍasamphasso na satthasamphasso ñātīpi mittāpi saṅgamma samāgamma na rosenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No cold, heat, hunger, thirst, defecation, or urination. No contact with fire, clubs, or knives. And relatives and friends don’t get together and annoy you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anabhinibbattiyā, āvuso, sati idaṃ sukhaṃ pāṭikaṅkhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no rebirth, this is the kind of happiness you can expect.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
