<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.176-176. Cundasutta  - 176. With Cunda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.176. 176. Cundasutta  - 176. With Cunda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Jāṇussoṇivagga  - 17. With Jāṇussoṇi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"> ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā pāvāyaṃ viharati cundassa kammāraputtassa ambavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Pāvā in Cunda the smith’s mango grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho cundo kammāraputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho cundaṃ kammāraputtaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Cunda the smith went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kassa no tvaṃ, cunda, soceyyāni rocesī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Cunda, whose purity do you believe in?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Brāhmaṇā, bhante, pacchābhūmakā kamaṇḍalukā sevālamālikā aggiparicārikā udakorohakā soceyyāni paññapenti; tesāhaṃ soceyyāni rocemī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I believe in the purity advocated by the western brahmins draped with moss who carry pitchers, serve the sacred flame, and immerse themselves in water.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana, cunda, brāhmaṇā pacchābhūmakā kamaṇḍalukā sevālamālikā aggiparicārikā udakorohakā soceyyāni paññapentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Cunda, what kind of purity do these western brahmins advocate?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhante, brāhmaṇā pacchābhūmakā kamaṇḍalukā sevālamālikā aggiparicārikā udakorohakā. Te sāvakaṃ evaṃ samādapenti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The western brahmins encourage their disciples like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ehi tvaṃ, ambho purisa, kālasseva uṭṭhahantova sayanamhā pathaviṃ āmaseyyāsi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, good people, rising early you should stroke the earth from your bed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce pathaviṃ āmaseyyāsi, allāni gomayāni āmaseyyāsi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t stroke the earth, stroke fresh cow dung. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce allāni gomayāni āmaseyyāsi, haritāni tiṇāni āmaseyyāsi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t stroke fresh cow dung, stroke green grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce haritāni tiṇāni āmaseyyāsi, aggiṃ paricareyyāsi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t stroke green grass, serve the sacred flame. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce aggiṃ paricareyyāsi, pañjaliko ādiccaṃ namasseyyāsi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t serve the sacred flame, revere the sun with joined palms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce pañjaliko ādiccaṃ namasseyyāsi, sāyatatiyakaṃ udakaṃ oroheyyāsī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t revere the sun with joined palms, immerse yourself in water three times, including the evening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhante, brāhmaṇā pacchābhūmakā kamaṇḍalukā sevālamālikā aggiparicārikā udakorohakā soceyyāni paññapenti; tesāhaṃ soceyyāni rocemī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The western brahmins advocate this kind of purity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññathā kho, cunda, brāhmaṇā pacchābhūmakā kamaṇḍalukā sevālamālikā aggiparicārikā udakorohakā soceyyāni paññapenti, aññathā ca pana ariyassa vinaye soceyyaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The purity advocated by the western brahmins is quite different from that in the training of the noble one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana, bhante, ariyassa vinaye soceyyaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what, Master Gotama, is purity in the training of the noble one? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā tathā dhammaṃ desetu yathā ariyassa vinaye soceyyaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Master Gotama, please teach me this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, cunda, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, brahmin, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho cundo kammāraputto bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Cunda replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tividhaṃ kho, cunda, kāyena asoceyyaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Cunda, impurity is threefold by way of body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubbidhaṃ vācāya asoceyyaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourfold by way of speech, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tividhaṃ manasā asoceyyaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and threefold by way of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, cunda, tividhaṃ kāyena asoceyyaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is impurity threefold by way of body? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, cunda, ekacco pāṇātipātī hoti luddo lohitapāṇi hatapahate niviṭṭho adayāpanno sabbapāṇabhūtesu. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a certain person kills living creatures. They’re violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādāyī hoti. Yaṃ taṃ parassa paravittūpakaraṇaṃ gāmagataṃ vā araññagataṃ vā taṃ adinnaṃ theyyasaṅkhātaṃ ādātā hoti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmesumicchācārī hoti. Yā tā māturakkhitā piturakkhitā mātāpiturakkhitā bhāturakkhitā bhaginirakkhitā ñātirakkhitā gottarakkhitā dhammarakkhitā sasāmikā saparidaṇḍā antamaso mālāguḷaparikkhittāpi, tathārūpāsu cārittaṃ āpajjitā hoti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They commit sexual misconduct. They have sexual relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They have sexual relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, cunda, tividhaṃ kāyena asoceyyaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the threefold impurity by way of body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, cunda, catubbidhaṃ vācāya asoceyyaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is impurity fourfold by way of speech? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, cunda, ekacco musāvādī hoti. Sabhaggato vā parisaggato vā ñātimajjhagato vā pūgamajjhagato vā rājakulamajjhagato vā abhinīto sakkhipuṭṭho: ‘ehambho purisa, yaṃ jānāsi taṃ vadehī’ti, so ajānaṃ vā āha: ‘jānāmī’ti, jānaṃ vā āha: ‘na jānāmī’ti; apassaṃ vā āha: ‘passāmī’ti, passaṃ vā āha: ‘na passāmī’ti. Iti attahetu vā parahetu vā āmisakiñcikkhahetu vā sampajānamusā bhāsitā hoti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a certain person lies. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, mister, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pisuṇavāco hoti. Ito sutvā amutra akkhātā imesaṃ bhedāya, amutra vā sutvā imesaṃ akkhātā amūsaṃ bhedāya. Iti samaggānaṃ vā bhettā, bhinnānaṃ vā anuppadātā, vaggārāmo vaggarato vagganandī vaggakaraṇiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They speak divisively. They repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division, loving division, speaking words that promote division. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusavāco hoti. Yā sā vācā aṇḍakā kakkasā parakaṭukā parābhisajjanī kodhasāmantā asamādhisaṃvattanikā, tathārūpiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty, hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samphappalāpī hoti akālavādī abhūtavādī anatthavādī adhammavādī avinayavādī; anidhānavatiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti akālena anapadesaṃ apariyantavatiṃ anatthasaṃhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and pointless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, cunda, catubbidhaṃ vācāya asoceyyaṃ hoti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourfold impurity by way of speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, cunda, tividhaṃ manasā asoceyyaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is impurity threefold by way of mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, cunda, ekacco abhijjhālu hoti. Yaṃ taṃ parassa paravittūpakaraṇaṃ taṃ abhijjhātā hoti: ‘aho vata yaṃ parassa taṃ mamassā’ti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a certain person is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpannacitto hoti paduṭṭhamanasaṅkappo: ‘ime sattā haññantu vā bajjhantu vā ucchijjantu vā vinassantu vā mā vā ahesun’ti. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have ill will and hateful intentions: ‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhiko hoti viparītadassano: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi dinnaṃ, natthi yiṭṭhaṃ, natthi hutaṃ, natthi sukaṭadukkaṭānaṃ kammānaṃ phalaṃ vipāko, natthi ayaṃ loko, natthi paro loko, natthi mātā, natthi pitā, natthi sattā opapātikā, natthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammaggatā sammāpaṭipannā ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no obligation to mother and father. No beings are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is well attained and practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, cunda, manasā tividhaṃ asoceyyaṃ hoti. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the threefold impurity by way of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, cunda, dasa akusalakammapathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten ways of doing unskillful deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, cunda, dasahi akusalehi kammapathehi samannāgato kālasseva uṭṭhahantova sayanamhā pathaviñcepi āmasati, asuciyeva hoti; no cepi pathaviṃ āmasati, asuciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you have these ten ways of doing unskillful deeds, then if you rise early, whether or not you stroke the earth from your bed, you’re still impure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Allāni cepi gomayāni āmasati, asuciyeva hoti; no cepi allāni gomayāni āmasati, asuciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you stroke fresh cow dung, you’re still impure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Haritāni cepi tiṇāni āmasati, asuciyeva hoti; no cepi haritāni tiṇāni āmasati, asuciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you stroke green grass, you’re still impure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggiñcepi paricarati, asuciyeva hoti, no cepi aggiṃ paricarati, asuciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you serve the sacred flame, you’re still impure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañjaliko cepi ādiccaṃ namassati, asuciyeva hoti; no cepi pañjaliko ādiccaṃ namassati, asuciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you revere the sun with joined palms, you’re still impure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāyatatiyakañcepi udakaṃ orohati, asuciyeva hoti; no cepi sāyatatiyakaṃ udakaṃ orohati, asuciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you immerse yourself in water three times, you’re still impure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime, cunda, dasa akusalakammapathā asucīyeva honti asucikaraṇā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These ten ways of doing unskillful deeds are impure and make things impure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ pana, cunda, dasannaṃ akusalānaṃ kammapathānaṃ samannāgamanahetu nirayo paññāyati, tiracchānayoni paññāyati, pettivisayo paññāyati, yā vā panaññāpi kāci duggatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of those who do these ten kinds of unskillful deeds that hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, or any other bad places are found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tividhaṃ kho, cunda, kāyena soceyyaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Cunda, purity is threefold by way of body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubbidhaṃ vācāya soceyyaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourfold by way of speech, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tividhaṃ manasā soceyyaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and threefold by way of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ, cunda, tividhaṃ kāyena soceyyaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is purity threefold by way of body? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, cunda, ekacco pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti nihitadaṇḍo nihitasattho, lajjī dayāpanno, sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī viharati. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a certain person gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādānaṃ pahāya, adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti. Yaṃ taṃ parassa paravittūpakaraṇaṃ gāmagataṃ vā araññagataṃ vā, na taṃ adinnaṃ theyyasaṅkhātaṃ ādātā hoti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up stealing. They don’t, with the intention to commit theft, take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmesumicchācāraṃ pahāya, kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti yā tā māturakkhitā piturakkhitā mātāpiturakkhitā bhāturakkhitā bhaginirakkhitā ñātirakkhitā gottarakkhitā dhammarakkhitā sasāmikā saparidaṇḍā antamaso mālāguḷaparikkhittāpi, tathārūpāsu na cārittaṃ āpajjitā hoti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up sexual misconduct. They don’t have sexual relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don’t have sexual relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, cunda, tividhaṃ kāyena soceyyaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the threefold purity by way of body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, cunda, catubbidhaṃ vācāya soceyyaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is purity fourfold by way of speech? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, cunda, ekacco musāvādaṃ pahāya musāvādā paṭivirato hoti. Sabhaggato vā parisaggato vā ñātimajjhagato vā pūgamajjhagato vā rājakulamajjhagato vā abhinīto sakkhipuṭṭho: ‘ehambho purisa, yaṃ jānāsi taṃ vadehī’ti, so ajānaṃ vā āha: ‘na jānāmī’ti, jānaṃ vā āha: ‘jānāmī’ti, apassaṃ vā āha: ‘na passāmī’ti, passaṃ vā āha: ‘passāmī’ti. Iti attahetu vā parahetu vā āmisakiñcikkhahetu vā na sampajānamusā bhāsitā hoti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a certain person gives up lying. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, mister, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ So they don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pisuṇaṃ vācaṃ pahāya, pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti—na ito sutvā amutra akkhātā imesaṃ bhedāya, na amutra vā sutvā imesaṃ akkhātā amūsaṃ bhedāya. Iti bhinnānaṃ vā sandhātā sahitānaṃ vā anuppadātā samaggārāmo samaggarato samagganandī samaggakaraṇiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up divisive speech. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusaṃ vācaṃ pahāya, pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti. Yā sā vācā nelā kaṇṇasukhā pemanīyā hadayaṅgamā porī bahujanakantā bahujanamanāpā, tathārūpiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samphappalāpaṃ pahāya, samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti kālavādī bhūtavādī atthavādī dhammavādī vinayavādī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nidhānavatiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti kālena sāpadesaṃ pariyantavatiṃ atthasaṃhitaṃ. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, cunda, catubbidhaṃ vācāya soceyyaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourfold purity by way of speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, cunda, tividhaṃ manasā soceyyaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is purity threefold by way of mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, cunda, ekacco anabhijjhālu hoti. Yaṃ taṃ parassa paravittūpakaraṇaṃ taṃ anabhijjhitā hoti: ‘aho vata yaṃ parassa taṃ mamassā’ti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a certain person is content. They don’t covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abyāpannacitto hoti appaduṭṭhamanasaṅkappo: ‘ime sattā averā hontu abyāpajjā, anīghā sukhī attānaṃ pariharantū’ti. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have a kind heart and loving intentions: ‘May these sentient beings live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhiko hoti aviparītadassano: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have right view, an undistorted perspective: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi dinnaṃ, atthi yiṭṭhaṃ, atthi hutaṃ, atthi sukaṭadukkaṭānaṃ kammānaṃ phalaṃ vipāko, atthi ayaṃ loko, atthi paro loko, atthi mātā, atthi pitā, atthi sattā opapātikā, atthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammaggatā sammāpaṭipannā ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There is obligation to mother and father. There are beings reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are well attained and practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, cunda, tividhaṃ manasā soceyyaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the threefold purity by way of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, cunda, dasa kusalakammapathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten ways of doing skillful deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, cunda, dasahi kusalehi kammapathehi samannāgato kālasseva uṭṭhahantova sayanamhā pathaviñcepi āmasati, suciyeva hoti; no cepi pathaviṃ āmasati, suciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you have these ten ways of doing skillful deeds, then if you rise early, whether or not you stroke the earth from your bed, you’re still pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Allāni cepi gomayāni āmasati, suciyeva hoti; no cepi allāni gomayāni āmasati, suciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you stroke fresh cow dung, you’re still pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Haritāni cepi tiṇāni āmasati, suciyeva hoti; no cepi haritāni tiṇāni āmasati, suciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you stroke green grass, you’re still pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggiñcepi paricarati, suciyeva hoti; no cepi aggiṃ paricarati, suciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you serve the sacred flame, you’re still pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañjaliko cepi ādiccaṃ namassati, suciyeva hoti; no cepi pañjaliko ādiccaṃ namassati, suciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you revere the sun with joined palms, you’re still pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāyatatiyakañcepi udakaṃ orohati, suciyeva hoti; no cepi sāyatatiyakaṃ udakaṃ orohati, suciyeva hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether or not you immerse yourself in water three times, you’re still pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime, cunda, dasa kusalakammapathā sucīyeva honti sucikaraṇā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These ten ways of doing skillful deeds are pure and make things pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ pana, cunda, dasannaṃ kusalānaṃ kammapathānaṃ samannāgamanahetu devā paññāyanti, manussā paññāyanti, yā vā panaññāpi kāci sugatiyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of those who do these ten kinds of skillful deeds that gods, humans, or any other good places are found.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, cundo kammāraputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Cunda the smith said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bhante … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, sir! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ, bhante, bhagavā dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
