<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.012-12. Pañcaṅgasutta  - 12. Five Factors </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.012. 12. Pañcaṅgasutta  - 12. Five Factors </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nāthavagga  - 2. A Protector </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcaṅgavippahīno, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgasamannāgato imasmiṃ dhammavinaye ‘kevalī vusitavā uttamapuriso’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in this teaching and training a mendicant who has given up five factors and possesses five factors is called consummate, accomplished, a supreme person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgavippahīno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant given up five factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno kāmacchando pahīno hoti, byāpādo pahīno hoti, thinamiddhaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, uddhaccakukkuccaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, vicikicchā pahīnā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgavippahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has given up five factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgasamannāgato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant have five factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu asekhena sīlakkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekhena samādhikkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekhena paññākkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekhena vimuttikkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekhena vimuttiñāṇadassanakkhandhena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has the entire spectrum of an adept’s ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgasamannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has five factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcaṅgavippahīno kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgasamannāgato imasmiṃ dhammavinaye ‘kevalī vusitavā uttamapuriso’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this teaching and training a mendicant who has given up five factors and possesses five factors is called consummate, accomplished, a supreme person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmacchando ca byāpādo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual desire, ill will, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">thinamiddhañca bhikkhuno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">dullness and drowsiness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaccaṃ vicikicchā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">restlessness, and doubt </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbasova na vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are not found in a mendicant at all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asekhena ca sīlena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">One like this is accomplished </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asekhena samādhinā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in an adept’s ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttiyā ca sampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">an adept’s immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñāṇena ca tathāvidho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and freedom and knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve pañcaṅgasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these five factors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca aṅge vivajjayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and rid of five factors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imasmiṃ dhammavinaye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">in this teaching and training </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kevalī iti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called ‘consummate’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
