<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.067-67. Paṭhamanaḷakapānasutta  - 67. At Naḷakapāna (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.067. 67. Paṭhamanaḷakapānasutta  - 67. At Naḷakapāna (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Yamakavagga  - 7. Pairs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu cārikaṃ caramāno mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ yena naḷakapānaṃ nāma kosalānaṃ nigamo tadavasari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a town of the Kosalans named Naḷakapāna. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra sudaṃ bhagavā naḷakapāne viharati palāsavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha stayed near Naḷakapāna in the parrot tree grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā tadahuposathe bhikkhusaṅghaparivuto nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time it was the sabbath, and the Buddha was sitting surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bahudeva rattiṃ bhikkhūnaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassetvā samādapetvā samuttejetvā sampahaṃsetvā tuṇhībhūtaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ bhikkhusaṅghaṃ anuviloketvā āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha spent most of the night educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk. Then he looked around the Saṅgha of monks, who were so very silent. He addressed Venerable Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vigatathinamiddho kho, sāriputta, bhikkhusaṃgho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sāriputta, the Saṅgha of mendicants is rid of dullness and drowsiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭibhātu taṃ, sāriputta, bhikkhūnaṃ dhammī kathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Give them some Dhamma talk as you feel inspired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piṭṭhi me āgilāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">My back is sore, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ āyamissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll stretch it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā sāriputto bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Sāriputta replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā catugguṇaṃ saṅghāṭiṃ paññāpetvā dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyyaṃ kappesi pāde pādaṃ accādhāya sato sampajāno uṭṭhānasaññaṃ manasi karitvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho āyasmā sāriputto bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āvuso bhikkhave”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āvuso”ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato sāriputtassa paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā sāriputto etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassa kassaci, āvuso, saddhā natthi kusalesu dhammesu, hirī natthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappaṃ natthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyaṃ natthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā natthi kusalesu dhammesu, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, hāniyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no vuddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, āvuso, kāḷapakkhe candassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, hāyateva vaṇṇena hāyati maṇḍalena hāyati ābhāya hāyati ārohapariṇāhena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like the moon in the waning fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, āvuso, yassa kassaci saddhā natthi kusalesu dhammesu, hirī natthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappaṃ natthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyaṃ natthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā natthi kusalesu dhammesu, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, hāniyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no vuddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Assaddho purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A faithless individual is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahiriko purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with no conscience is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anottappī purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An imprudent individual is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kusīto purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lazy individual is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘duppañño purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A witless individual is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kodhano purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An irritable individual is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘upanāhī purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A hostile individual is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pāpiccho purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with bad desires is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pāpamitto purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with bad friends is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘micchādiṭṭhiko purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, parihānametaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with wrong view is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, āvuso, saddhā atthi kusalesu dhammesu, hirī atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappaṃ atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā atthi kusalesu dhammesu, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, āvuso, juṇhapakkhe candassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, vaḍḍhateva vaṇṇena vaḍḍhati maṇḍalena vaḍḍhati ābhāya vaḍḍhati ārohapariṇāhena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like the moon in the waxing fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, āvuso, yassa kassaci saddhā atthi kusalesu dhammesu, hirī atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, whoever has faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappaṃ atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyaṃ atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā atthi kusalesu dhammesu, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saddho purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A faithful individual doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘hirīmā purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with a conscience doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ottappī purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A prudent individual doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘āraddhavīriyo purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An energetic individual doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paññavā purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wise individual doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘akkodhano purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A loving individual doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anupanāhī purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A kind individual doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘appiccho purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with few desires doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kalyāṇamitto purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with good friends doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammādiṭṭhiko purisapuggalo’ti, āvuso, aparihānametan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with right view doesn’t decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā paccuṭṭhāya āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Sāriputta! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, sāriputta, saddhā natthi kusalesu dhammesu, hirī natthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappaṃ natthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyaṃ natthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā natthi kusalesu dhammesu, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, hāniyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no vuddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, kāḷapakkhe candassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, hāyateva vaṇṇena hāyati maṇḍalena hāyati ābhāya hāyati ārohapariṇāhena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like the moon in the waning fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, sāriputta, yassa kassaci saddhā natthi kusalesu dhammesu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā natthi kusalesu dhammesu, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā … pe … no vuddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Assaddho purisapuggalo’ti, sāriputta, parihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A faithless individual is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahiriko … </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with no conscience … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anottappī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">imprudent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kusīto … </span></p>
<p class="p3">lazy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duppañño … </span></p>
<p class="p3">witless … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodhano … </span></p>
<p class="p3">irritable … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanāhī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">hostile … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpiccho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">with bad desires … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpamitto … </span></p>
<p class="p3">bad friends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘micchādiṭṭhiko purisapuggalo’ti, sāriputta, parihānametaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with wrong view is in decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, sāriputta, saddhā atthi kusalesu dhammesu, hirī atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappaṃ atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyaṃ atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā atthi kusalesu dhammesu, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, juṇhapakkhe candassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, vaḍḍhateva vaṇṇena vaḍḍhati maṇḍalena vaḍḍhati ābhāya vaḍḍhati ārohapariṇāhena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like the moon in the waxing fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, sāriputta, yassa kassaci saddhā atthi kusalesu dhammesu, hirī atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, whoever has faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappaṃ atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyaṃ atthi … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā atthi kusalesu dhammesu, tassa yā ratti vā divaso vā āgacchati, vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saddho purisapuggalo’ti, sāriputta, aparihānametaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A faithful individual doesn’t decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hirīmā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A conscientious individual … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">prudent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraddhavīriyo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energetic … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">wise … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkodhano … </span></p>
<p class="p3">loving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupanāhī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">kind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appiccho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">with few desires … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇamitto … </span></p>
<p class="p3">good friends … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammādiṭṭhiko purisapuggalo’ti, sāriputta, aparihānametan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with right view doesn’t decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
