<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.220-220. Adhammacariyāsutta  - 220. Unprincipled Conduct </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.220. 220. Adhammacariyāsutta  - 220. Unprincipled Conduct </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Karajakāyavagga  - 21. The Body Born of Deeds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bho gotama, hetu ko paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, Master Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Adhammacariyāvisamacariyāhetu kho, brāhmaṇa, evam’idhekacce sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko pana, bho gotama, hetu ko paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what is the cause, Master Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhammacariyāsamacariyāhetu kho, brāhmaṇa, evam’idhekacce sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho ahaṃ imassa bhoto gotamassa saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t understand the detailed meaning of what Master Gotama has said in brief. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu me bhavaṃ gotamo tathā dhammaṃ desetu yathāhaṃ imassa bhoto gotamassa saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṃ ājāneyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Master Gotama, teach me this matter so I can understand the detailed meaning.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, brāhmaṇa, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, brahmin, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”ti kho so brāhmaṇo bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” the brahmin replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tividhā kho, brāhmaṇa, kāyena adhammacariyāvisamacariyā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubbidhā vācāya adhammacariyāvisamacariyā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourfold by way of speech, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tividhā manasā adhammacariyāvisamacariyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and threefold by way of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, brāhmaṇa, tividhā kāyena adhammacariyāvisamacariyā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of body? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, tividhā kāyena adhammacariyā visamacariyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, brāhmaṇa, catubbidhā vācāya adhammacariyāvisamacariyā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct fourfold by way of speech? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, catubbidhā vācāya adhammacariyāvisamacariyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, brāhmaṇa, tividhā manasā adhammacariyāvisamacariyā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of mind? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, tividhā manasā adhammacariyāvisamacariyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ adhammacariyāvisamacariyāhetu kho, brāhmaṇa, evam’idhekacce sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tividhā, brāhmaṇa, kāyena dhammacariyāsamacariyā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubbidhā vācāya dhammacariyāsamacariyā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourfold by way of speech, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tividhā manasā dhammacariyāsamacariyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and threefold by way of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, brāhmaṇa, tividhā kāyena dhammacariyāsamacariyā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of body? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, tividhā kāyena dhammacariyāsamacariyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, brāhmaṇa, catubbidhā vācāya dhammacariyāsamacariyā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is principled and moral conduct fourfold by way of speech? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, catubbidhā vācāya dhammacariyāsamacariyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how principled and moral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, brāhmaṇa, tividhā manasā dhammacariyāsamacariyā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of mind? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, tividhā manasā dhammacariyāsamacariyā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dhammacariyāsamacariyāhetu kho, brāhmaṇa, evam’idhekacce sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karajakāyavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
