<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.069-69. Paṭhamakathāvatthusutta  - 69. Topics of Discussion (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.069. 69. Paṭhamakathāvatthusutta  - 69. Topics of Discussion (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Yamakavagga  - 7. Pairs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā upaṭṭhānasālāyaṃ sannisinnā sannipatitā anekavihitaṃ tiracchānakathaṃ anuyuttā viharanti, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time, after the meal, on return from alms-round, several mendicants sat together in the meeting hall. They engaged in all kinds of unworthy talk, such as </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājakathaṃ corakathaṃ mahāmattakathaṃ senākathaṃ bhayakathaṃ yuddhakathaṃ annakathaṃ pānakathaṃ vatthakathaṃ sayanakathaṃ mālākathaṃ gandhakathaṃ ñātikathaṃ yānakathaṃ gāmakathaṃ nigamakathaṃ nagarakathaṃ janapadakathaṃ itthikathaṃ sūrakathaṃ visikhākathaṃ kumbhaṭṭhānakathaṃ pubbapetakathaṃ nānattakathaṃ lokakkhāyikaṃ samuddakkhāyikaṃ itibhavābhavakathaṃ iti vāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">talk about kings, bandits, and ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that state of existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena upaṭṭhānasālā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat spread out </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kāya nuttha, bhikkhave, etarahi kathāya sannisinnā sannipatitā, kā ca pana vo antarākathā vippakatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha mayaṃ, bhante, pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā upaṭṭhānasālāyaṃ sannisinnā sannipatitā anekavihitaṃ tiracchānakathaṃ anuyuttā viharāma, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājakathaṃ corakathaṃ … pe … itibhavābhavakathaṃ iti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho panetaṃ, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ patirūpaṃ kulaputtānaṃ saddhāya agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitānaṃ, yaṃ tumhe anekavihitaṃ tiracchānakathaṃ anuyuttā vihareyyātha, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, it is not appropriate for you gentlemen who have gone forth in faith from the lay life to homelessness to engage in these kinds of unworthy talk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājakathaṃ corakathaṃ mahāmattakathaṃ senākathaṃ bhayakathaṃ yuddhakathaṃ annakathaṃ pānakathaṃ vatthakathaṃ sayanakathaṃ mālākathaṃ gandhakathaṃ ñātikathaṃ yānakathaṃ gāmakathaṃ nigamakathaṃ nagarakathaṃ janapadakathaṃ itthikathaṃ sūrakathaṃ visikhākathaṃ kumbhaṭṭhānakathaṃ pubbapetakathaṃ nānattakathaṃ lokakkhāyikaṃ samuddakkhāyikaṃ itibhavābhavakathaṃ iti vāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasayimāni, bhikkhave, kathāvatthūni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are, mendicants, these ten topics of discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appicchakathā, santuṭṭhikathā, pavivekakathā, asaṃsaggakathā, vīriyārambhakathā, sīlakathā, samādhikathā, paññākathā, vimuttikathā, vimuttiñāṇadassanakathāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Talk about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, dasa kathāvatthūni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten topics of discussion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesañce tumhe, bhikkhave, dasannaṃ kathāvatthūnaṃ upādāyupādāya kathaṃ katheyyātha, imesampi candimasūriyānaṃ evaṃmahiddhikānaṃ evaṃmahānubhāvānaṃ tejasā tejaṃ pariyādiyeyyātha, ko pana vādo aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, if you bring up these topics of conversation again and again then your glory could surpass even the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful, let alone the wanderers who follow other paths.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
