<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.116-116. Ajitasutta  - 116. With Ajita </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.116. 116. Ajitasutta  - 116. With Ajita </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Paccorohaṇivagga  - 12. The Ceremony of Descent </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho ajito paribbājako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Ajita went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho ajito paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amhākaṃ, bho gotama, paṇḍito nāma sabrahmacārī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, we have a spiritual companion called ‘The Philosopher’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena pañcamattāni cittaṭṭhānasatāni cintitāni, yehi aññatitthiyā upāraddhāva jānanti upāraddhasmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has worked out around five hundred arguments by which followers of other paths will know when they’ve been refuted.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dhāretha no tumhe, bhikkhave, paṇḍitavatthūnī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, do you remember this philosopher’s points?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etassa, bhagavā, kālo etassa, sugata, kālo </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ bhagavā bhāseyya, bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let the Buddha speak and the mendicants will remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhikkhave, suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, mendicants, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco adhammikena vādena adhammikaṃ vādaṃ abhiniggaṇhāti abhinippīḷeti, tena ca adhammikaṃ parisaṃ rañjeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, take a certain person who rebuts and quashes unprincipled statements with unprincipled statements. This delights an unprincipled assembly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena sā adhammikā parisā uccāsaddamahāsaddā hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">who make a dreadful racket: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇḍito vata bho, paṇḍito vata bho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He’s a true philosopher! He’s a true philosopher!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco adhammikena vādena dhammikaṃ vādaṃ abhiniggaṇhāti abhinippīḷeti, tena ca adhammikaṃ parisaṃ rañjeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Another person rebuts and quashes principled statements with unprincipled statements. This delights an unprincipled assembly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena sā adhammikā parisā uccāsaddamahāsaddā hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">who make a dreadful racket: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇḍito vata bho, paṇḍito vata bho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He’s a true philosopher! He’s a true philosopher!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco adhammikena vādena dhammikañca vādaṃ adhammikañca vādaṃ abhiniggaṇhāti abhinippīḷeti, tena ca adhammikaṃ parisaṃ rañjeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Another person rebuts and quashes principled and unprincipled statements with unprincipled statements. This delights an unprincipled assembly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena sā adhammikā parisā uccāsaddamahāsaddā hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">who make a dreadful racket: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇḍito vata bho, paṇḍito vata bho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He’s a true philosopher! He’s a true philosopher!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know bad results and good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, adhammo, katamo ca dhammo, katamo ca anattho, katamo ca attho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad results? And what are good results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhi, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāsaṅkappo, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong thought is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsaṅkappo dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right thought is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāvācā, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong speech is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācā dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right speech is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchākammanto, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong action is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammanto dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right action is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāājīvo, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong livelihood is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvo dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right livelihood is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāvāyāmo, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong effort is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmo dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right effort is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāsati, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong mindfulness is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsati dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right mindfulness is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāsamādhi, bhikkhave adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong immersion is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhi dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right immersion is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāñāṇaṃ, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong knowledge is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāñāṇaṃ dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right knowledge is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāvimutti, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong freedom is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvimutti dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right freedom is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right freedom are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You should know bad principles and good principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know bad results and good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabban’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
