<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.081-81. Vāhanasutta  - 81. With Bāhuna </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.081. 81. Vāhanasutta  - 81. With Bāhuna </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Theravagga  - 9. Senior Mendicants </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā campāyaṃ viharati gaggarāya pokkharaṇiyā tīre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vāhano yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā vāhano bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Bāhuna went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katihi nu kho, bhante, dhammehi tathāgato nissaṭo visaṃyutto vippamutto vimariyādīkatena cetasā viharatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how many things has the Realized One escaped from, so that he lives unattached, liberated, his mind free of limits?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasahi kho, vāhana, dhammehi tathāgato nissaṭo visaṃyutto vippamutto vimariyādīkatena cetasā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bāhuna, the Realized One has escaped from ten things, so that he lives unattached, liberated, his mind free of limits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpena kho, vāhana, tathāgato nissaṭo visaṃyutto vippamutto vimariyādīkatena cetasā viharati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāya kho, vāhana … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāya kho, vāhana … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārehi kho, vāhana … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇena kho, vāhana … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātiyā kho, vāhana … </span></p>
<p class="p3">rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarāya kho, vāhana … </span></p>
<p class="p3">old age … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maraṇena kho, vāhana … </span></p>
<p class="p3">death … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhehi kho, vāhana … </span></p>
<p class="p3">suffering … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kilesehi kho, vāhana, tathāgato nissaṭo visaṃyutto vippamutto vimariyādīkatena cetasā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">defilements … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, vāhana, uppalaṃ vā padumaṃ vā puṇḍarīkaṃ vā udake jātaṃ udake saṃvaḍḍhaṃ udakā paccuggamma ṭhitaṃ anupalittaṃ udakena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a blue water lily, or a pink or white lotus. Though it sprouted and grew in the water, it would rise up above the water and stand with no water clinging to it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, vāhana, imehi dasahi dhammehi tathāgato nissaṭo visaṃyutto vippamutto vimariyādīkatena cetasā viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the Realized One has escaped from ten things, so that he lives unattached, liberated, his mind free of limits.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
