<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.218-218. Dutiyasañcetanikasutta  - 218. Intentional (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.218. 218. Dutiyasañcetanikasutta  - 218. Intentional (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Karajakāyavagga  - 21. The Body Born of Deeds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṃ kammānaṃ katānaṃ upacitānaṃ appaṭisaṃveditvā byantībhāvaṃ vadāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tañca kho diṭṭheva dhamme upapajje vā apare vā pariyāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that may be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tvevāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṃ kammānaṃ katānaṃ upacitānaṃ appaṭisaṃveditvā dukkhassantakiriyaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I don’t say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubbidhā vacīkammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tividhā manokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tividhakāyakammantasandosabyāpattiakusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjanti, catubbidhavacīkammanta … pe … tividhamanokammantasandosabyāpattiakusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṃ kammānaṃ katānaṃ upacitānaṃ appaṭisaṃveditvā byantībhāvaṃ vadāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tañca kho diṭṭheva dhamme upapajje vā apare vā pariyāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that may be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tvevāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṃ kammānaṃ katānaṃ upacitānaṃ appaṭisaṃveditvā dukkhassantakiriyaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I don’t say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catubbidhā vacīkammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tividhā manokammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three kinds of successful bodily action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of successful verbal action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the three kinds of successful mental action? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three kinds of successful mental action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tividhakāyakammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjanti; catubbidhavacīkammantasampatti … pe … tividhamanokammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
