<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.020-20. Dutiyaariyāvāsasutta  - 20. Abodes of the Noble Ones (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.020. 20. Dutiyaariyāvāsasutta  - 20. Abodes of the Noble Ones (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nāthavagga  - 2. A Protector </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kurūsu viharati kammāsadhammaṃ nāma kurūnaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasayime, bhikkhave, ariyāvāsā, ye ariyā āvasiṃsu vā āvasanti vā āvasissanti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these ten noble abodes in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgavippahīno hoti, chaḷaṅgasamannāgato, ekārakkho, caturāpasseno, paṇunnapaccekasacco, samavayasaṭṭhesano, anāvilasaṅkappo, passaddhakāyasaṅkhāro, suvimuttacitto, suvimuttapañño. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant has given up five factors, possesses six factors, has a single guard, has four supports, has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has unsullied intentions, has stilled the physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgavippahīno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant given up five factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno kāmacchando pahīno hoti, byāpādo pahīno hoti, thinamiddhaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, uddhaccakukkuccaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, vicikicchā pahīnā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgavippahīno hoti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has given up five factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chaḷaṅgasamannāgato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant possess six factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā neva sumano hoti na dummano, upekkhako viharati sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hearing a sound with their ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smelling an odor with their nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tasting a flavor with their tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling a touch with their body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya neva sumano hoti na dummano, upekkhako viharati sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing a thought with their mind, they’re neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chaḷaṅgasamannāgato hoti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant possesses six factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ekārakkho hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant have a single guard? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satārakkhena cetasā samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant’s heart is guarded by mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ekārakkho hoti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has a single guard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu caturāpasseno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant have four supports? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After reflection, a mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu caturāpasseno hoti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has four supports. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu paṇunnapaccekasacco hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno yāni tāni puthusamaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ puthupaccekasaccāni, seyyathidaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth. For example: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sassato loko’ti vā, ‘asassato loko’ti vā, ‘antavā loko’ti vā, ‘anantavā loko’ti vā, ‘taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīran’ti vā, ‘aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīran’ti vā, ‘hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā’ti vā, ‘na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā’ti vā, ‘hoti ca na ca hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā’ti vā, ‘neva hoti na na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā’ti vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the world is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are the same thing, or they are different things; after death, a Realized One exists, or doesn’t exist, or both exists and doesn’t exist, or neither exists nor doesn’t exist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbāni tāni nunnāni honti paṇunnāni cattāni vantāni muttāni pahīnāni paṭinissaṭṭhāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant has dispelled, eliminated, thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu paṇunnapaccekasacco hoti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu samavayasaṭṭhesano hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno kāmesanā pahīnā hoti, bhavesanā pahīnā hoti, brahmacariyesanā paṭippassaddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when they’ve given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and for a spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu samavayasaṭṭhesano hoti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has totally given up searching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anāvilasaṅkappo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno kāmasaṅkappo pahīno hoti, byāpādasaṅkappo pahīno hoti, vihiṃsāsaṅkappo pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has given up intentions of sensuality, malice, and cruelty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anāvilasaṅkappo hoti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has unsullied intentions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu passaddhakāyasaṅkhāro hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu passaddhakāyasaṅkhāro hoti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has stilled the physical process. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu suvimuttacitto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant well freed in mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ hoti, dosā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ hoti, mohā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant’s mind is freed from greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu suvimuttacitto hoti. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is well freed in mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu suvimuttapañño hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘rāgo me pahīno ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo’ti pajānāti, doso me pahīno … pe … ‘moho me pahīno ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant understands: ‘I’ve given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they’re unable to arise in the future.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu suvimuttapañño hoti. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant’s mind is well freed by wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṃ ariyā ariyāvāse āvasiṃsu, sabbe te imeva dasa ariyāvāse āvasiṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, whether in the past, future, or present, all the noble ones of noble abodes abide in these same ten noble abodes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ ariyā ariyāvāse āvasissanti, sabbe te imeva dasa ariyāvāse āvasissanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi ariyā ariyāvāse āvasanti, sabbe te imeva dasa ariyāvāse āvasanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa ariyāvāsā, ye ariyā āvasiṃsu vā āvasanti vā āvasissanti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten noble abodes in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāthavaggo dutiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Senāsanañca pañcaṅgaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojanākhilena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamādo āhuneyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve nāthā dve ariyāvāsāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
