<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.010-10. Moranivāpasutta  - 10. At the Peacocks’ Feeding Ground </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.010. 10. Moranivāpasutta  - 10. At the Peacocks’ Feeding Ground </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nissayavagga  - 1. Dependence </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati moranivāpe paribbājakārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, at the monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asekhena sīlakkhandhena, asekhena samādhikkhandhena, asekhena paññākkhandhena—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The entire spectrum of an adept’s ethics, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi, kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparehipi, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has another three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iddhipāṭihāriyena, ādesanāpāṭihāriyena, anusāsanīpāṭihāriyena—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of revealing, and a demonstration of instruction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti, accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparehipi, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has another three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhiyā, sammāñāṇena, sammāvimuttiyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has two qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dvīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjāya, caraṇena—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge and conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, dvīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these two qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmunā pesā, bhikkhave, sanaṅkumārena gāthā bhāsitā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra also spoke this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khattiyo seṭṭho janetasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The aristocrat is best of those people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye gottapaṭisārino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who take clan as the standard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjācaraṇasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so seṭṭho devamānuse’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is best of gods and humans.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho panesā, bhikkhave, sanaṅkumārena gāthā bhāsitā subhāsitā, no dubbhāsitā; atthasaṃhitā, no anatthasaṃhitā; anumatā mayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, that verse spoken by Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra is well spoken, not poorly spoken. It’s beneficial, not pointless, and I agree with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampi, bhikkhave, evaṃ vadāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I also say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khattiyo seṭṭho janetasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The aristocrat is best of those people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye gottapaṭisārino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who take clan as the standard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjācaraṇasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so seṭṭho devamānuse’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is best of gods and humans.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissayavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kimatthiyā cetanā tayo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanisā byasanena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve saññā manasikāro, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddho moranivāpakanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
