<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.019-19. Dutiyasamādhisutta  - 19. Immersion (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.019. 19. Dutiyasamādhisutta  - 19. Immersion (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Anussativagga  - 2. Recollection </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā nu kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa, na āpasmiṃ āposaññī assa … pe … na ākiñcaññāyatane ākiñcaññāyatanasaññī assa, na nevasaññānāsaññāyatane nevasaññānāsaññāyatanasaññī assa, na idhaloke idhalokasaññī assa, na paraloke paralokasaññī assa, yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā tatrāpi na saññī assa; saññī ca pana assā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Could it be, mendicants, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this? They wouldn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn’t perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṃnettikā bhagavaṃpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu vata, bhante, bhagavantaṃyeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhikkhave, suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, mendicants, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa … pe … yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā tatrāpi na saññī assa; saññī ca pana assā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A mendicant could gain such a state of immersion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana, bhante, siyā bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa … pe … yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā tatrāpi na saññī assa; saññī ca pana assā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how could this be?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu evaṃsaññī hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a mendicant perceives: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ santaṃ etaṃ paṇītaṃ, yadidaṃ sabbasaṅkhārasamatho sabbūpadhipaṭinissaggo taṇhākkhayo virāgo nirodho nibbānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, siyā bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa … pe … yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā tatrāpi na saññī assa; saññī ca pana assā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They wouldn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn’t perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
