<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.009-9. Saddhasutta  - 9. With Sandha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.009. 9. Saddhasutta  - 9. With Sandha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nissayavagga  - 1. Dependence </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā nātike viharati giñjakāvasathe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Nādika in the brick house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā saddho yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ saddhaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sandha went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ājānīyajhāyitaṃ kho, saddha, jhāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sandha, meditate like a thoroughbred, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā khaḷuṅkajhāyitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not like a wild colt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, khaḷuṅkajhāyitaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a wild colt meditate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assakhaḷuṅko hi, saddha, doṇiyā baddho ‘yavasaṃ yavasan’ti jhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wild colt, tied up by the feeding trough, meditates: ‘Fodder, fodder!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi, saddha, assakhaḷuṅkassa doṇiyā baddhassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because it doesn’t occur to the wild colt tied up by the feeding trough: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kiṃ nu kho maṃ ajja assadammasārathi kāraṇaṃ kāressati, kimassāhaṃ paṭikaromī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What task will the horse trainer have me do today? How should I respond?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So doṇiyā baddho ‘yavasaṃ yavasan’ti jhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tied up by the feeding trough they just meditate: ‘Fodder, fodder!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, saddha, idhekacco purisakhaḷuṅko araññagatopi rukkhamūlagatopi suññāgāragatopi kāmarāgapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati kāmarāgaparetena uppannassa ca kāmarāgassa nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, take a certain wild person who has gone to the forest, the root of a tree, or an empty hut. Their heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire, and they don’t truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāmarāgaṃyeva antaraṃ katvā jhāyati pajjhāyati nijjhāyati avajjhāyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Harboring sensual desire within they meditate and concentrate and contemplate and ruminate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">byāpādapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is overcome by ill will … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">thinamiddhapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">dullness and drowsiness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddhaccakukkuccapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">restlessness and remorse … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vicikicchāpariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati vicikicchāparetena, uppannāya ca vicikicchāya nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">doubt … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vicikicchaṃyeva antaraṃ katvā jhāyati pajjhāyati nijjhāyati avajjhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Harboring doubt within they meditate and concentrate and contemplate and ruminate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pathavimpi nissāya jhāyati, āpampi nissāya jhāyati, tejampi nissāya jhāyati, vāyampi nissāya jhāyati, ākāsānañcāyatanampi nissāya jhāyati, viññāṇañcāyatanampi nissāya jhāyati, ākiñcaññāyatanampi nissāya jhāyati, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanampi nissāya jhāyati, idhalokampi nissāya jhāyati, paralokampi nissāya jhāyati, yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā, tampi nissāya jhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate dependent on earth, water, fire, and air. They meditate dependent on the dimension of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, or neither perception nor non-perception. They meditate dependent on this world or the other world. They meditate dependent on what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, saddha, purisakhaḷuṅkajhāyitaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a wild colt meditates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, saddha, ājānīyajhāyitaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a thoroughbred meditate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhadro hi, saddha, assājānīyo doṇiyā baddho na ‘yavasaṃ yavasan’ti jhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fine thoroughbred, tied up by the feeding trough, doesn’t meditate: ‘Fodder, fodder!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhadrassa hi, saddha, assājānīyassa doṇiyā baddhassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because it occurs to the fine thoroughbred tied up by the feeding trough: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kiṃ nu kho maṃ ajja assadammasārathi kāraṇaṃ kāressati, kimassāhaṃ paṭikaromī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What task will the horse trainer have me do today? How should I respond?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So doṇiyā baddho na ‘yavasaṃ yavasan’ti jhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tied up by the feeding trough they don’t meditate: ‘Fodder, fodder!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhadro hi, saddha, assājānīyo yathā iṇaṃ yathā bandhaṃ yathā jāniṃ yathā kaliṃ evaṃ patodassa ajjhoharaṇaṃ samanupassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For that fine thoroughbred regards the use of the goad as a debt, a bond, a loss, a misfortune. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, saddha, bhadro purisājānīyo araññagatopi rukkhamūlagatopi suññāgāragatopi na kāmarāgapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati na kāmarāgaparetena, uppannassa ca kāmarāgassa nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, take a certain fine thoroughbred person who has gone to the forest, the root of a tree, or an empty hut. Their heart is not overcome and mired in sensual desire, and they truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na byāpādapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their heart is not overcome by ill will … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na thinamiddhapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">dullness and drowsiness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na uddhaccakukkuccapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">restlessness and remorse … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vicikicchāpariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati na vicikicchāparetena, uppannāya ca vicikicchāya nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">doubt … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So neva pathaviṃ nissāya jhāyati, na āpaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na tejaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na vāyaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na idhalokaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na paralokaṃ nissāya jhāyati, yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā, tampi nissāya na jhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t meditate dependent on earth, water, fire, and air. They don’t meditate dependent on the dimension of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, or neither perception nor non-perception. They don’t meditate dependent on this world or the other world. They don’t meditate dependent on what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jhāyati ca pana. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet they do meditate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ jhāyiñca pana, saddha, bhadraṃ purisājānīyaṃ saindā devā sabrahmakā sapajāpatikā ārakāva namassanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a fine thoroughbred meditates like this, the gods together with Indra, Brahmā, and Pajāpati worship them from afar: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Namo te purisājañña, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Homage to you, O thoroughbred! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">namo te purisuttama; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Homage to you, supreme among men! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa te nābhijānāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We don’t understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampi nissāya jhāyasī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the basis of your absorption.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā saddho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Sandha asked the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ jhāyī pana, bhante, bhadro purisājānīyo neva pathaviṃ nissāya jhāyati, na āpaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na tejaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na vāyaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na idhalokaṃ nissāya jhāyati, na paralokaṃ nissāya jhāyati, yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā, tampi nissāya na jhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how does that fine thoroughbred meditate?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jhāyati ca pana? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ jhāyiñca pana, bhante, bhadraṃ purisājānīyaṃ saindā devā sabrahmakā sapajāpatikā ārakāva namassanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Namo te purisājañña, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">namo te purisuttama; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa te nābhijānāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampi nissāya jhāyasī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, saddha, bhadrassa purisājānīyassa pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññā vibhūtā hoti, āpasmiṃ āposaññā vibhūtā hoti, tejasmiṃ tejosaññā vibhūtā hoti, vāyasmiṃ vāyosaññā vibhūtā hoti, ākāsānañcāyatane ākāsānañcāyatanasaññā vibhūtā hoti, viññāṇañcāyatane viññāṇañcāyatanasaññā vibhūtā hoti, ākiñcaññāyatane ākiñcaññāyatanasaññā vibhūtā hoti, nevasaññānāsaññāyatane nevasaññānāsaññāyatanasaññā vibhūtā hoti, idhaloke idhalokasaññā vibhūtā hoti, paraloke paralokasaññā vibhūtā hoti, yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā, tatrāpi saññā vibhūtā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sandha, for a fine thoroughbred person, the perception of earth has vanished in relation to earth. The perception of water … fire … air has vanished in relation to air. The perception of the dimension of infinite space has vanished in relation to the dimension of infinite space. The perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness … nothingness … neither perception nor non-perception has vanished in relation to the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. The perception of this world has vanished in relation to this world. The perception of the other world has vanished in relation to the other world. And the perception of what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind has vanished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ jhāyī kho, saddha, bhadro purisājānīyo neva pathaviṃ nissāya jhāyati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how that fine thoroughbred person doesn’t meditate dependent on earth, water, fire, and air. They don’t meditate dependent on the dimension of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, or neither perception nor non-perception. They don’t meditate dependent on this world or the other world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā, tampi nissāya na jhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t meditate dependent on what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jhāyati ca pana. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet they do meditate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ jhāyiñca pana, saddha, bhadraṃ purisājānīyaṃ saindā devā sabrahmakā sapajāpatikā ārakāva namassanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a fine thoroughbred person meditates like this, the gods together with Indra, Brahmā, and Pajāpati worship them from afar: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Namo te purisājañña, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Homage to you, O thoroughbred! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">namo te purisuttama; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Homage to you, supreme among men! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa te nābhijānāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We don’t understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampi nissāya jhāyasī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the basis of your absorption.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
