<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.023-23. Bhayasutta  - 23. Dangers </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.023. 23. Bhayasutta  - 23. Dangers </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Anuttariyavagga  - 3. Unsurpassable </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Bhayan’ti, bhikkhave, kāmānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘Danger’, mendicants, is a term for sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘dukkhan’ti, bhikkhave, kāmānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suffering’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘rogo’ti, bhikkhave, kāmānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘disease’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gaṇḍo’ti, bhikkhave, kāmānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘boil’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṅgo’ti, bhikkhave, kāmānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘tie’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṅko’ti, bhikkhave, kāmānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ‘bog’ are terms for sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, ‘bhayan’ti kāmānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why is ‘danger’ a term for sensual pleasures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmarāgarattāyaṃ, bhikkhave, chandarāgavinibaddho diṭṭhadhammikāpi bhayā na parimuccati, samparāyikāpi bhayā na parimuccati, tasmā ‘bhayan’ti kāmānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who is caught up in sensual greed and shackled by lustful desire is not freed from dangers in the present life or in lives to come. That is why ‘danger’ is a term for sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā ca, bhikkhave, dukkhanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why are ‘suffering’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rogoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘disease’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gaṇḍoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘boil’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘tie’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṅkoti kāmānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ‘bog’ terms for sensual pleasures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmarāgarattāyaṃ, bhikkhave, chandarāgavinibaddho diṭṭhadhammikāpi paṅkā na parimuccati, samparāyikāpi paṅkā na parimuccati, tasmā ‘paṅko’ti kāmānametaṃ adhivacananti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who is caught up in sensual greed and shackled by lustful desire is not freed from suffering, disease, boils, ties, or bogs in the present life or in lives to come. That is why these are terms for sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhayaṃ dukkhaṃ rogo gaṇḍo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Danger, suffering, disease, boils, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgo paṅko ca ubhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ties and bogs both. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete kāmā pavuccanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These describe the sensual pleasures </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha satto puthujjano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to which ordinary people are attached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upādāne bhayaṃ disvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing the danger in grasping, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātimaraṇasambhave; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the origin of birth and death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupādā vimuccanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re freed by not grasping, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātimaraṇasaṅkhaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of birth and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te khemappattā sukhino, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Happy, they’ve come to a safe place, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhadhammābhinibbutā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">extinguished in this very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaverabhayātītā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve gone beyond all threats and dangers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbadukkhaṃ upaccagun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and risen above all suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
