<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.083-83. Aggadhammasutta  - 83. The Best Thing </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.083. 83. Aggadhammasutta  - 83. The Best Thing </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Arahattavagga  - 8. Perfection </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu abhabbo aggaṃ dhammaṃ arahattaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can’t realize the best thing, perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu assaddho hoti, ahiriko hoti, anottappī hoti, kusīto hoti, duppañño hoti, kāye ca jīvite ca sāpekkho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless. And they’re concerned with their body and their life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu abhabbo aggaṃ dhammaṃ arahattaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these six qualities can’t realize the best thing, perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu bhabbo aggaṃ dhammaṃ arahattaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with six qualities can realize the best thing, perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddho hoti, hirīmā hoti, ottappī hoti, āraddhavīriyo hoti, paññavā hoti, kāye ca jīvite ca anapekkho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and wise. And they have no concern for their body and their life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu bhabbo aggaṃ dhammaṃ arahattaṃ sacchikātun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these six qualities can realize the best thing, perfection.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
