<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.024-24. Himavantasutta  - 24. The Himalaya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.024. 24. Himavantasutta  - 24. The Himalaya </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Anuttariyavagga  - 3. Unsurpassable </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu himavantaṃ pabbatarājaṃ padāleyya, ko pana vādo chavāya avijjāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant who has six qualities could shatter Himalaya, the king of mountains, let alone this wretched ignorance! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu samādhissa samāpattikusalo hoti, samādhissa ṭhitikusalo hoti, samādhissa vuṭṭhānakusalo hoti, samādhissa kallitakusalo hoti, samādhissa gocarakusalo hoti, samādhissa abhinīhārakusalo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is skilled in entering immersion, skilled in remaining in immersion, skilled in emerging from immersion, skilled in gladdening the mind for immersion, skilled in the meditation subjects for immersion, and skilled in projecting the mind purified by immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu himavantaṃ pabbatarājaṃ padāleyya, ko pana vādo chavāya avijjāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has these six qualities could shatter Himalaya, the king of mountains, let alone this wretched ignorance!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
