<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.049-49. Khemasutta  - 49. With Khema </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.049. 49. Khemasutta  - 49. With Khema </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Dhammikavagga  - 5. About Dhammika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā ca khemo āyasmā ca sumano sāvatthiyaṃ viharanti andhavanasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Khema and Venerable Sumana were staying near Sāvatthī in the Dark Forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ca khemo āyasmā ca sumano yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā khemo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Venerable Khema said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo so, bhante, bhikkhu arahaṃ khīṇāsavo vusitavā katakaraṇīyo ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojano sammadaññāvimutto tassa na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, a mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and is rightly freed through enlightenment—does not think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi me seyyoti vā atthi me sadisoti vā atthi me hīnoti vā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is someone better than me, or equal to me, or worse than me.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavocāyasmā khemo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what Khema said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanuñño satthā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teacher approved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā khemo “samanuñño me satthā”ti uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Khema, knowing that the teacher approved, got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sumano acirapakkante āyasmante kheme bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then, not long after Khema had left, Sumana said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo so, bhante, bhikkhu arahaṃ khīṇāsavo vusitavā katakaraṇīyo ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojano sammadaññāvimutto tassa na evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, a mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and is rightly freed through enlightenment—does not think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi me seyyoti vā natthi me sadisoti vā natthi me hīnoti vā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is someone better than me, or equal to me, or worse than me.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavocāyasmā sumano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what Sumana said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanuñño satthā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teacher approved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sumano “samanuñño me satthā”ti uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sumana, knowing that the teacher approved, got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā acirapakkantesu āyasmante ca kheme āyasmante ca sumane bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then, soon after Khema and Sumana had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, kulaputtā aññaṃ byākaronti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this is how gentlemen declare enlightenment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attho ca vutto attā ca anupanīto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The goal is spoken of, but the self is not involved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ca pana idhekacce moghapurisā hasamānakā maññe aññaṃ byākaronti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it seems that there are some foolish people here who declare enlightenment as a joke. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te pacchā vighātaṃ āpajjantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Later they will fall into anguish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ussesu na omesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t rank themselves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samatte nopanīyare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as being higher, or lower, or equal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇā jāti vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caranti saṃyojanavippamuttā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live freed from fetters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
