<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.067-67. Mittasutta  - 67. Friends </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.067. 67. Mittasutta  - 67. Friends </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Devatāvagga  - 7. A God </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘So vata, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pāpamitto pāpasahāyo pāpasampavaṅko, pāpamitte sevamāno bhajamāno payirupāsamāno, tesañca diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjamāno ābhisamācārikaṃ dhammaṃ paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, it’s totally impossible that a mendicant with bad friends, companions, and associates, while frequenting, accompanying, and attending, and following their example, will fulfill the practice dealing with the supplementary regulations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ābhisamācārikaṃ dhammaṃ aparipūretvā sekhaṃ dhammaṃ paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without fulfilling the practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it’s impossible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sekhaṃ dhammaṃ aparipūretvā sīlāni paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without fulfilling the practice of a trainee, it’s impossible to fulfill ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sīlāni aparipūretvā kāmarāgaṃ vā rūparāgaṃ vā arūparāgaṃ vā pajahissatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without fulfilling ethics, it’s impossible give up desire to be reborn in the realm of luminous form or in the formless realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘So vata, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto kalyāṇasahāyo kalyāṇasampavaṅko, kalyāṇamitte sevamāno bhajamāno payirupāsamāno, tesañca diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjamāno ābhisamācārikaṃ dhammaṃ paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s possible that a mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates, while frequenting, accompanying, and attending, and following their example, will fulfill the practice dealing with the supplementary regulations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ābhisamācārikaṃ dhammaṃ paripūretvā sekhaṃ dhammaṃ paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having fulfilled the practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it’s possible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sekhaṃ dhammaṃ paripūretvā sīlāni paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having fulfilled the practice of a trainee, it’s possible to fulfill ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sīlāni paripūretvā kāmarāgaṃ vā rūparāgaṃ vā arūparāgaṃ vā pajahissatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having fulfilled ethics, it’s possible give up desire to be reborn in the realm of luminous form or in the formless realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
