<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.118-118. Dhammānupassīsutta  - 118. Observing Principles, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.118. 118. Dhammānupassīsutta  - 118. Observing Principles, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Sāmaññavagga  - 12. The Ascetic Life </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme appahāya abhabbo ajjhattaṃ kāye … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, without giving up six things you can’t meditate observing an aspect of the body internally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahiddhā kāye … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattabahiddhā kāye … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body internally and externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattaṃ vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings internally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahiddhā vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattabahiddhā vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings internally and externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattaṃ citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind internally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahiddhā citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattabahiddhā citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind internally and externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattaṃ dhammesu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles internally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahiddhā dhammesu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles externally … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattabahiddhā dhammesu dhammānupassī viharituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles internally and externally. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammārāmataṃ, bhassārāmataṃ, niddārāmataṃ, saṅgaṇikārāmataṃ, indriyesu aguttadvārataṃ, bhojane amattaññutaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Relishing work, talk, sleep, and company, not guarding the sense doors, and eating too much. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme pahāya bhabbo ajjhattabahiddhā dhammesu dhammānupassī viharitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up these six qualities you can meditate observing an aspect of principles internally and externally.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
