<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.078-78. Sukhasomanassasutta  - 78. Joy and Happiness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.078. 78. Sukhasomanassasutta  - 78. Joy and Happiness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Arahattavagga  - 8. Perfection </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme sukhasomanassabahulo viharati, yoni cassa āraddhā hoti āsavānaṃ khayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a mendicant has six things they’re full of joy and happiness in the present life, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhammārāmo hoti, bhāvanārāmo hoti, pahānārāmo hoti, pavivekārāmo hoti, abyāpajjhārāmo hoti, nippapañcārāmo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant enjoys the teaching, meditation, giving up, seclusion, kindness, and non-proliferation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme sukhasomanassabahulo viharati, yoni cassa āraddhā hoti āsavānaṃ khayāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has these six things they’re full of joy and happiness in the present life, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
