<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.088-88. Sussūsatisutta  - 88. Wanting to Listen </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.088. 88. Sussūsatisutta  - 88. Wanting to Listen </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sītivagga  - 9. Coolness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato suṇantopi saddhammaṃ abhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye desiyamāne na sussūsati, na sotaṃ odahati, na aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhāpeti, anatthaṃ gaṇhāti, atthaṃ riñcati, ananulomikāya khantiyā samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the teaching and practice proclaimed by the Realized One is being taught they don’t want to listen. They don’t lend an ear or apply their mind to understand them. They learn the incorrect meaning and reject the correct meaning. They accept views that contradict the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato suṇantopi saddhammaṃ abhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato suṇanto saddhammaṃ bhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye desiyamāne sussūsati, sotaṃ odahati, aññā cittaṃ upaṭṭhāpeti, atthaṃ gaṇhāti, anatthaṃ riñcati, anulomikāya khantiyā samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the teaching and practice proclaimed by the Realized One is being taught they want to listen. They lend an ear and apply their mind to understand them. They learn the correct meaning and reject the incorrect meaning. They accept views that agree with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato suṇanto saddhammaṃ bhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
