<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.077-77. Uttarimanussadhammasutta  - 77. Superhuman States </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.077. 77. Uttarimanussadhammasutta  - 77. Superhuman States </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Arahattavagga  - 8. Perfection </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme appahāya abhabbo uttari manussadhammaṃ alamariyañāṇadassanavisesaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, without giving up six qualities you can’t realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muṭṭhassaccaṃ, asampajaññaṃ, indriyesu aguttadvārataṃ, bhojane amattaññutaṃ, kuhanaṃ, lapanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness, not guarding the sense doors, eating too much, deceit, and flattery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme appahāya abhabbo uttari manussadhammaṃ alamariyañāṇadassanavisesaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without giving up these six qualities you can’t realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme pahāya bhabbo uttari manussadhammaṃ alamariyañāṇadassanavisesaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But after giving up six qualities you can realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muṭṭhassaccaṃ, asampajaññaṃ, indriyesu aguttadvārataṃ, bhojane amattaññutaṃ, kuhanaṃ, lapanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness, not guarding the sense doors, eating too much, deceit, and flattery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme pahāya bhabbo uttari manussadhammaṃ alamariyañāṇadassanavisesaṃ sacchikātun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up these six qualities you can realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
