<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.108-108. Duccaritasutta  - 108. Bad Conduct </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.108. 108. Duccaritasutta  - 108. Bad Conduct </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Tikavagga  - 11. Triads </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyaduccaritaṃ, vacīduccaritaṃ, manoduccaritaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tiṇṇaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya tayo dhammā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To give up these three things you should develop three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyaduccaritassa pahānāya kāyasucaritaṃ bhāvetabbaṃ, vacīduccaritassa pahānāya vacīsucaritaṃ bhāvetabbaṃ, manoduccaritassa pahānāya manosucaritaṃ bhāvetabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should develop good bodily conduct to give up bad bodily conduct, good verbal conduct to give up bad verbal conduct, and good mental conduct to give up bad mental conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tiṇṇaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya ime tayo dhammā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things you should develop to give up those three things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
