<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.098-98. Aniccasutta  - 98. Impermanence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.098. 98. Aniccasutta  - 98. Impermanence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Ānisaṃsavagga  - 10. Benefit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘So vata, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kañci saṅkhāraṃ niccato samanupassanto anulomikāya khantiyā samannāgato bhavissatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, it’s totally impossible for a mendicant who regards any condition as permanent to accept views that agree with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Anulomikāya khantiyā asamannāgato sammattaniyāmaṃ okkamissatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without accepting views that agree with the teaching, it’s impossible to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sammattaniyāmaṃ anokkamamāno sotāpattiphalaṃ vā sakadāgāmiphalaṃ vā anāgāmiphalaṃ vā arahattaṃ vā sacchikarissatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without entering the sure path, it’s impossible to realize the fruit of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, or perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘So vata, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sabbasaṅkhāre aniccato samanupassanto anulomikāya khantiyā samannāgato bhavissatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s totally possible for a mendicant who regards all conditions as impermanent to accept views that agree with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Anulomikāya khantiyā samannāgato sammattaniyāmaṃ okkamissatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having accepted views that agree with the teaching, it’s possible to enter the sure path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sammattaniyāmaṃ okkamamāno sotāpattiphalaṃ vā sakadāgāmiphalaṃ vā anāgāmiphalaṃ vā arahattaṃ vā sacchikarissatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having entered the sure path, it’s possible to realize the fruit of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, or perfection.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
