<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.050-50. Indriyasaṃvarasutta  - 50. Sense Restraint </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.050. 50. Indriyasaṃvarasutta  - 50. Sense Restraint </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Dhammikavagga  - 5. About Dhammika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Indriyasaṃvare, bhikkhave, asati indriyasaṃvaravipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti sīlaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīle asati sīlavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti sammāsamādhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no ethical conduct, one who lacks ethics has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhimhi asati sammāsamādhivipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathābhūtañāṇadassane asati yathābhūtañāṇadassanavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti nibbidāvirāgo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbidāvirāge asati nibbidāvirāgavipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rukkho sākhāpalāsavipanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa papaṭikāpi na pāripūriṃ gacchati, tacopi na pāripūriṃ gacchati, pheggupi na pāripūriṃ gacchati, sāropi na pāripūriṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, indriyasaṃvare asati indriyasaṃvaravipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti sīlaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indriyasaṃvare, bhikkhave, sati indriyasaṃvarasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti sīlaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is sense restraint, one who has sense restraint has fulfilled a vital condition for ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīle sati sīlasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti sammāsamādhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is ethical conduct, one who has fulfilled ethical conduct has fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhimhi sati sammāsamādhisampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathābhūtañāṇadassane sati yathābhūtañāṇadassanasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti nibbidāvirāgo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbidāvirāge sati nibbidāvirāgasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rukkho sākhāpalāsasampanno. Tassa papaṭikāpi pāripūriṃ gacchati, tacopi pāripūriṃ gacchati, pheggupi pāripūriṃ gacchati, sāropi pāripūriṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would all grow to fullness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, indriyasaṃvare sati indriyasaṃvarasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti sīlaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when there is sense restraint, one who has fulfilled sense restraint has fulfilled a vital condition for ethical conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttiñāṇadassanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
