<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.092-92. Paṭhamaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta  - 92. Things That Can’t Be Done (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.092. 92. Paṭhamaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta  - 92. Things That Can’t Be Done (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sītivagga  - 9. Coolness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chayimāni, bhikkhave, abhabbaṭṭhānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these six things can’t be done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo satthari agāravo viharituṃ appatisso, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo dhamme agāravo viharituṃ appatisso, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo saṅghe agāravo viharituṃ appatisso, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo sikkhāya agāravo viharituṃ appatisso, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo anāgamanīyaṃ vatthuṃ paccāgantuṃ, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo aṭṭhamaṃ bhavaṃ nibbattetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person accomplished in view can’t live disrespectful and irreverent toward the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, or the training. They can’t establish their belief on unreliable grounds. And they can’t generate an eighth rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cha abhabbaṭṭhānānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the six things that can’t be done.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
