<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.093-93. Dutiyaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta  - 93. Things That Can’t Be Done (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.093. 93. Dutiyaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta  - 93. Things That Can’t Be Done (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sītivagga  - 9. Coolness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chayimāni, bhikkhave, abhabbaṭṭhānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these six things can’t be done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo kañci saṅkhāraṃ niccato upagantuṃ, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo kañci saṅkhāraṃ sukhato upagantuṃ, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo kañci dhammaṃ attato upagantuṃ, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo ānantariyaṃ kammaṃ kātuṃ, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo kotūhalamaṅgalena suddhiṃ paccāgantuṃ, abhabbo diṭṭhisampanno puggalo ito bahiddhā dakkhiṇeyyaṃ gavesituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person accomplished in view can’t take conditions to be permanent, happiness, or self. They can’t do deeds with fixed result in the next life. They can’t fall back on purification through noisy, superstitious rites. They can’t seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of religious donations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cha abhabbaṭṭhānānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the six things that can’t be done.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
