<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.111-111. Dhātusutta  - 111. Elements </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.111. 111. Dhātusutta  - 111. Elements </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Tikavagga  - 11. Triads </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmadhātu, byāpādadhātu, vihiṃsādhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The elements of sensuality, malice, and cruelty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tiṇṇaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya tayo dhammā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To give up these three things you should develop three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmadhātuyā pahānāya nekkhammadhātu bhāvetabbā, byāpādadhātuyā pahānāya abyāpādadhātu bhāvetabbā, vihiṃsādhātuyā pahānāya avihiṃsādhātu bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should develop the element of renunciation to give up the element of sensuality, the element of good will to give up the element of malice, and the element of harmlessness to give up the element of cruelty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tiṇṇaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya ime tayo dhammā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things you should develop to give up those three things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
