<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.073-73. Paṭhamatajjhānasutta  - 73. First Absorption (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.073. 73. Paṭhamatajjhānasutta  - 73. First Absorption (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Devatāvagga  - 7. A God </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme appahāya abhabbo paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can’t enter and remain in the first absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmacchandaṃ, byāpādaṃ, thinamiddhaṃ, uddhaccakukkuccaṃ, vicikicchaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Desire for sensual pleasures, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmesu kho panassa ādīnavo na yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the drawbacks of sensual pleasures haven’t been truly seen clearly with right wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme appahāya abhabbo paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without giving up these six qualities you can’t enter and remain in the first absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme pahāya bhabbo paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But after giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmacchandaṃ, byāpādaṃ, thinamiddhaṃ, uddhaccakukkuccaṃ, vicikicchaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Desire for sensual pleasures, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmesu kho panassa ādīnavo na yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the drawbacks of sensual pleasures have been truly seen clearly with right wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme pahāya bhabbo paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
