<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.048-48. Dutiyasandiṭṭhikasutta  - 48. Visible in This Very Life (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.048. 48. Dutiyasandiṭṭhikasutta  - 48. Visible in This Very Life (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Dhammikavagga  - 5. About Dhammika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘sandiṭṭhiko dhammo, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo’ti, bho gotama, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, they speak of ‘a teaching visible in this very life’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bho gotama, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In what way is the teaching visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, brāhmaṇa, taññevettha paṭipucchissāmi. Yathā te khameyya tathā naṃ byākareyyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, brahmin, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, brāhmaṇa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, brahmin? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ rāgaṃ ‘atthi me ajjhattaṃ rāgo’ti pajānāsi, asantaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ rāgaṃ ‘natthi me ajjhattaṃ rāgo’ti pajānāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there’s greed in you, do you understand ‘I have greed in me’? And when there’s no greed in you, do you understand ‘I have no greed in me’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ rāgaṃ ‘atthi me ajjhattaṃ rāgo’ti pajānāsi, asantaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ rāgaṃ ‘natthi me ajjhattaṃ rāgo’ti pajānāsi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since you know this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi kho, brāhmaṇa, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is how the teaching is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, brāhmaṇa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, brahmin? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ dosaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there’s hate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ mohaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">delusion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ kāyasandosaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">corruption that leads to physical deeds … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ vacīsandosaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">corruption that leads to speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ manosandosaṃ ‘atthi me ajjhattaṃ manosandoso’ti pajānāsi, asantaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ manosandosaṃ ‘natthi me ajjhattaṃ manosandoso’ti pajānāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there’s corruption that leads to mental deeds in you, do you understand ‘I have corruption that leads to mental deeds in me’? And when there’s no corruption that leads to mental deeds in you, do you understand ‘I have no corruption that leads to mental deeds in me’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ manosandosaṃ ‘atthi me ajjhattaṃ manosandoso’ti pajānāsi, asantaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ manosandosaṃ ‘natthi me ajjhattaṃ manosandoso’ti pajānāsi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since you know this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is how the teaching is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
