<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.104-104. Atammayasutta  - 104. Non-identification </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.104. 104. Atammayasutta  - 104. Non-identification </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Ānisaṃsavagga  - 10. Benefit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cha, bhikkhave, ānisaṃse sampassamānena alameva bhikkhunā sabbadhammesu anodhiṃ karitvā anattasaññaṃ upaṭṭhāpetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of not-self in all things without qualification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaloke ca atammayo bhavissāmi, ahaṅkārā ca me uparujjhissanti, mamaṅkārā ca me uparujjhissanti, asādhāraṇena ca ñāṇena samannāgato bhavissāmi, hetu ca me sudiṭṭho bhavissati, hetusamuppannā ca dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I will be without identification in the whole world.’ ‘My I-makings will stop.’ ‘My mine-makings will stop.’ ‘I will have unshared knowledge.’ ‘I will clearly see causes and the phenomena that arise from causes.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha ānisaṃse sampassamānena alameva bhikkhunā sabbadhammesu anodhiṃ karitvā anattasaññaṃ upaṭṭhāpetun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing these six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of not-self in all things without qualification.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
