<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.052-52. Khattiyasutta  - 52. Aristocrats </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.052. 52. Khattiyasutta  - 52. Aristocrats </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Dhammikavagga  - 5. About Dhammika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho jāṇussoṇi brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho jāṇussoṇi brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khattiyā, bho gotama, kiṃadhippāyā, kiṃupavicārā, kiṃadhiṭṭhānā, kiṃabhinivesā, kiṃpariyosānā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Aristocrats, Master Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their preoccupation? What are they dedicated to? What do they insist on? What is their ultimate goal?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khattiyā kho, brāhmaṇa, bhogādhippāyā paññūpavicārā balādhiṭṭhānā pathavībhinivesā issariyapariyosānā”ti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Aristocrats, brahmin, have wealth as their ambition. They’re preoccupied with wisdom. They’re dedicated to power. They insist on territory. Their ultimate goal is authority.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Brāhmaṇā pana, bho gotama, kiṃadhippāyā, kiṃupavicārā, kiṃadhiṭṭhānā, kiṃabhinivesā, kiṃpariyosānā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmins, Master Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their preoccupation? What are they dedicated to? What do they insist on? What is their ultimate goal?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Brāhmaṇā kho, brāhmaṇa, bhogādhippāyā paññūpavicārā mantādhiṭṭhānā yaññābhinivesā brahmalokapariyosānā”ti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmins have wealth as their ambition. They’re preoccupied with wisdom. They’re dedicated to the hymns. They insist on sacrifice. Their ultimate goal is the Brahmā realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gahapatikā pana, bho gotama, kiṃadhippāyā, kiṃupavicārā, kiṃadhiṭṭhānā, kiṃabhinivesā, kiṃpariyosānā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householders, Master Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their preoccupation? What are they dedicated to? What do they insist on? What is their ultimate goal?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gahapatikā kho, brāhmaṇa, bhogādhippāyā paññūpavicārā sippādhiṭṭhānā kammantābhinivesā niṭṭhitakammantapariyosānā”ti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householders have wealth as their ambition. They’re preoccupied with wisdom. They’re dedicated to their profession. They insist on work. Their ultimate goal is to complete their work.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Itthī pana, bho gotama, kiṃadhippāyā, kiṃupavicārā, kiṃadhiṭṭhānā, kiṃabhinivesā, kiṃpariyosānā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Women, Master Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their preoccupation? What are they dedicated to? What do they insist on? What is their ultimate goal?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Itthī kho, brāhmaṇa, purisādhippāyā alaṅkārūpavicārā puttādhiṭṭhānā asapattībhinivesā issariyapariyosānā”ti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Women have a man as their ambition. They’re preoccupied with adornments. They’re dedicated to their children. They insist on being without a co-wife. Their ultimate goal is authority.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Corā pana, bho gotama, kiṃadhippāyā, kiṃupavicārā, kiṃadhiṭṭhānā, kiṃabhinivesā, kiṃpariyosānā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bandits, Master Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their preoccupation? What are they dedicated to? What do they insist on? What is their ultimate goal?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Corā kho, brāhmaṇa, ādānādhippāyā gahanūpavicārā satthādhiṭṭhānā andhakārābhinivesā adassanapariyosānā”ti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bandits have theft as their ambition. They’re preoccupied with a hiding place. They’re dedicated to their sword. They insist on darkness. Their ultimate goal is invisibility.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Samaṇā pana, bho gotama, kiṃadhippāyā, kiṃupavicārā, kiṃadhiṭṭhānā, kiṃabhinivesā, kiṃpariyosānā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ascetics, Master Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their preoccupation? What are they dedicated to? What do they insist on? What is their ultimate goal?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Samaṇā kho, brāhmaṇa, khantisoraccādhippāyā paññūpavicārā sīlādhiṭṭhānā ākiñcaññābhinivesā nibbānapariyosānā”ti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ascetics have patience and gentleness as their ambition. They’re preoccupied with wisdom. They’re dedicated to ethical conduct. They insist on owning nothing. Their ultimate goal is extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bho gotama, abbhutaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, Master Gotama, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khattiyānampi bhavaṃ gotamo jānāti adhippāyañca upavicārañca adhiṭṭhānañca abhinivesañca pariyosānañca. Brāhmaṇānampi bhavaṃ gotamo jānāti … pe … gahapatīnampi bhavaṃ gotamo jānāti … itthīnampi bhavaṃ gotamo jānāti … corānampi bhavaṃ gotamo jānāti … samaṇānampi bhavaṃ gotamo jānāti adhippāyañca upavicārañca adhiṭṭhānañca abhinivesañca pariyosānañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Master Gotama knows the ambition, preoccupation, dedication, insistence, and ultimate goal of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, women, bandits, and ascetics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
