<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.029-29. Udāyīsutta  - 29. With Udāyī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.029. 29. Udāyīsutta  - 29. With Udāyī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Anuttariyavagga  - 3. Unsurpassable </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ udāyiṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Udāyī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kati nu kho, udāyi, anussatiṭṭhānānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Udāyī, how many topics for recollection are there?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā udāyī tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Udāyī kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ udāyiṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kati nu kho, udāyi, anussatiṭṭhānānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho āyasmā udāyī tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ udāyiṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time, the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kati nu kho, udāyi, anussatiṭṭhānānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Udāyī, how many topics for recollection are there?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho āyasmā udāyī tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a second time and a third time Udāyī kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ udāyiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda said to Venerable Udāyī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“satthā taṃ, āvuso udāyi, āmantesī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Udāyī, the teacher is addressing you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṇomahaṃ, āvuso ānanda, bhagavato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Ānanda, I hear the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhante, bhikkhu anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati—Seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo … pe …. Iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhante, anussatiṭṭhānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a topic for recollection.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aññāsiṃ kho ahaṃ, ānanda: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, I know that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nevāyaṃ udāyī moghapuriso adhicittaṃ anuyutto viharatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this silly man Udāyī is not committed to the higher mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kati nu kho, ānanda, anussatiṭṭhānānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda, how many topics for recollection are there?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañca, bhante, anussatiṭṭhānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, there are five topics for recollection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhante, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi … pe … tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhante, anussatiṭṭhānaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ evaṃ bahulīkataṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārāya saṃvattati. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to blissful meditation in this very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Puna caparaṃ, bhante, bhikkhu ālokasaññaṃ manasi karoti, divā saññaṃ adhiṭṭhāti, yathā divā tathā rattiṃ, yathā rattiṃ tathā divā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant focuses on the perception of light, concentrating on the perception of day regardless of whether it is night or day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vivaṭena cetasā apariyonaddhena sappabhāsaṃ cittaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that’s full of radiance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhante, anussatiṭṭhānaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ evaṃ bahulīkataṃ ñāṇadassanappaṭilābhāya saṃvattati. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhante, bhikkhu imameva kāyaṃ uddhaṃ pādatalā adho kesamatthakā tacapariyantaṃ pūraṃ nānappakārassa asucino paccavekkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi imasmiṃ kāye kesā lomā nakhā dantā taco, maṃsaṃ nhāru aṭṭhi aṭṭhimiñjaṃ vakkaṃ, hadayaṃ yakanaṃ kilomakaṃ pihakaṃ papphāsaṃ, antaṃ antaguṇaṃ udariyaṃ karīsaṃ, pittaṃ semhaṃ pubbo lohitaṃ sedo medo, assu vasā kheḷo siṅghāṇikā lasikā muttan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In this body there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhante, anussatiṭṭhānaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ evaṃ bahulīkataṃ kāmarāgappahānāya saṃvattati. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to giving up sensual desire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhante, bhikkhu seyyathāpi passeyya sarīraṃ sivathikāya chaṭṭitaṃ ekāhamataṃ vā dvīhamataṃ vā tīhamataṃ vā uddhumātakaṃ vinīlakaṃ vipubbakajātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse thrown in a charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days, bloated, livid, and festering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imameva kāyaṃ evaṃ upasaṃharati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d compare it with their own body: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayampi kho kāyo evaṃdhammo evaṃbhāvī evaṃanatīto’ti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi vā pana passeyya sarīraṃ sīvathikāya chaṭṭitaṃ kākehi vā khajjamānaṃ kulalehi vā khajjamānaṃ gijjhehi vā khajjamānaṃ sunakhehi vā khajjamānaṃ siṅgālehi vā khajjamānaṃ vividhehi vā pāṇakajātehi khajjamānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or suppose they were to see a corpse thrown in a charnel ground being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, herons, dogs, tigers, leopards, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imameva kāyaṃ evaṃ upasaṃharati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d compare it with their own body: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayampi kho kāyo evaṃdhammo evaṃbhāvī evaṃanatīto’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi vā pana passeyya sarīraṃ sīvathikāya chaṭṭitaṃ aṭṭhikasaṅkhalikaṃ samaṃsalohitaṃ nhārusambandhaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse thrown in a charnel ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhikasaṅkhalikaṃ nimmaṃsalohitamakkhitaṃ nhārusambandhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by sinews … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhikasaṅkhalikaṃ apagatamaṃsalohitaṃ nhārusambandhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhikāni apagatasambandhāni disāvidisāvikkhittāni, aññena hatthaṭṭhikaṃ aññena pādaṭṭhikaṃ aññena jaṅghaṭṭhikaṃ aññena ūruṭṭhikaṃ aññena kaṭiṭṭhikaṃ aññena phāsukaṭṭhikaṃ aññena piṭṭhikaṇṭakaṭṭhikaṃ aññena khandhaṭṭhikaṃ aññena gīvaṭṭhikaṃ aññena hanukaṭṭhikaṃ aññena dantakaṭṭhikaṃ aññena sīsakaṭāhaṃ, aṭṭhikāni setāni saṅkhavaṇṇappaṭibhāgāni aṭṭhikāni puñjakitāni terovassikāni aṭṭhikāni pūtīni cuṇṇakajātāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bones rid of sinews scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here a shin-bone, there a thigh-bone, here a hip-bone, there a rib-bone, here a back-bone, there an arm-bone, here a neck-bone, there a jaw-bone, here a tooth, there the skull … White bones, the color of shells … Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile … Bones rotted and crumbled to powder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imameva kāyaṃ evaṃ upasaṃharati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d compare it with their own body: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayampi kho kāyo evaṃdhammo evaṃbhāvī evaṃanatīto’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhante, anussatiṭṭhānaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ evaṃ bahulīkataṃ asmimānasamugghātāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to uprooting the conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhante, bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhante, anussatiṭṭhānaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ evaṃ bahulīkataṃ anekadhātupaṭivedhāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to the penetration of many elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhante, pañca anussatiṭṭhānānī”ti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five topics for recollection.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, ānanda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Ānanda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena hi tvaṃ, ānanda, idampi chaṭṭhaṃ anussatiṭṭhānaṃ dhārehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well then, Ānanda, you should also remember this sixth topic for recollection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu satova abhikkamati satova paṭikkamati satova tiṭṭhati satova nisīdati satova seyyaṃ kappeti satova kammaṃ adhiṭṭhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this case, a mendicant goes out mindfully, returns mindfully, stands mindfully, sits mindfully, lies down mindfully, and applies themselves to work mindfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, ānanda, anussatiṭṭhānaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ evaṃ bahulīkataṃ satisampajaññāya saṃvattatī”ti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to mindfulness and situational awareness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
