<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.228-228. Paṭhamasamuddasutta  - 228. The Ocean (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.228. 228. Paṭhamasamuddasutta  - 228. The Ocean (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Samuddavagga  - 18. The Ocean </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Samuddo, samuddo’ti, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano bhāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, an uneducated ordinary person speaks of the ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neso, bhikkhave, ariyassa vinaye samuddo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not the ocean in the training of the noble one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahā eso, bhikkhave, udakarāsi mahāudakaṇṇavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s just a large body of water, a large sea of water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu, bhikkhave, purisassa samuddo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a person, the eye is an ocean, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa rūpamayo vego. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and its currents are made of sights. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo taṃ rūpamayaṃ vegaṃ sahati, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, atari cakkhusamuddaṃ saūmiṃ sāvaṭṭaṃ sagāhaṃ sarakkhasaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who can withstand those currents is said to have crossed over the ocean of the eye, with its waves and whirlpools, its sharks, and monsters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇo pāraṅgato thale tiṭṭhati brāhmaṇo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Crossed over, the brahmin stands on the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā, bhikkhave, purisassa samuddo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a person, the ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa rasamayo vego. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo taṃ rasamayaṃ vegaṃ sahati, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, atari jivhāsamuddaṃ saūmiṃ sāvaṭṭaṃ sagāhaṃ sarakkhasaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇo pāraṅgato thale tiṭṭhati brāhmaṇo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano, bhikkhave, purisassa samuddo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind is an ocean, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa dhammamayo vego. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and its currents are made of thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo taṃ dhammamayaṃ vegaṃ sahati, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, atari manosamuddaṃ saūmiṃ sāvaṭṭaṃ sagāhaṃ sarakkhasaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who can withstand those currents is said to have crossed over the ocean of the mind, with its waves and whirlpools, its sharks, and monsters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇo pāraṅgato thale tiṭṭhati brāhmaṇo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Crossed over, the brahmin stands on the far shore.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo imaṃ samuddaṃ sagāhaṃ sarakkhasaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A knowledge master who’s crossed the ocean so hard to cross, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saūmiṃ sāvaṭṭaṃ sabhayaṃ duttaraṃ accatari; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with its sharks and monsters, its waves, whirlpools, and dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa vedagū vusitabrahmacariyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve completed the spiritual journey, and gone to the end of the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokantagū pāragatoti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called ‘one who has gone beyond’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
