<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.240-240. Kummopamasutta  - 240. The Simile of the Tortoise </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.240. 240. Kummopamasutta  - 240. The Simile of the Tortoise </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Āsīvisavagga  - 19. The Simile of the Vipers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, kummo kacchapo sāyanhasamayaṃ anunadītīre gocarapasuto ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, a tortoise was grazing along the bank of a river in the afternoon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siṅgālopi kho, bhikkhave, sāyanhasamayaṃ anunadītīre gocarapasuto ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the same time, a jackal was also hunting along the river bank. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho, bhikkhave, kummo kacchapo siṅgālaṃ dūratova gocarapasutaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The tortoise saw the jackal off in the distance hunting, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna soṇḍipañcamāni aṅgāni sake kapāle samodahitvā appossukko tuṇhībhūto saṅkasāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so it drew its limbs and neck inside its shell, and kept still and silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siṅgālopi kho, bhikkhave, addasa kummaṃ kacchapaṃ dūratova gocarapasutaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the jackal also saw the tortoise off in the distance grazing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna yena kummo kacchapo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā kummaṃ kacchapaṃ paccupaṭṭhito ahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So it went up to the tortoise and waiting nearby, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yadāyaṃ kummo kacchapo soṇḍipañcamānaṃ aṅgānaṃ aññataraṃ vā aññataraṃ vā aṅgaṃ abhininnāmessati, tattheva naṃ gahetvā uddālitvā khādissāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When that tortoise sticks one or other of its limbs or neck out from its shell, I’ll grab it right there, rip it out, and eat it!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā kho, bhikkhave, kummo kacchapo soṇḍipañcamānaṃ aṅgānaṃ aññataraṃ vā aññataraṃ vā aṅgaṃ na abhininnāmi, atha siṅgālo kummamhā nibbijja pakkāmi, otāraṃ alabhamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when that tortoise didn’t stick one or other of its limbs or neck out from its shell, the jackal left disappointed, since it couldn’t find a vulnerability. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, tumhepi māro pāpimā satataṃ samitaṃ paccupaṭṭhito: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, Māra the Wicked is always waiting nearby, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘appeva nāmāhaṃ imesaṃ cakkhuto vā otāraṃ labheyyaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Hopefully I can find a vulnerability in the eye, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāto vā otāraṃ labheyyaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">ear, nose, tongue, body, or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manato vā otāraṃ labheyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, indriyesu guttadvārā viharatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should live with sense doors guarded. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā mā nimittaggāhino ahuvattha, mā anubyañjanaggāhino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you see a sight with your eyes, don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjatha, rakkhatha cakkhundriyaṃ, cakkhundriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you hear a sound with your ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you smell an odor with your nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you taste a flavor with your tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you feel a touch with your body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya mā nimittaggāhino ahuvattha, mā anubyañjanaggāhino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you know a thought with your mind, don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjatha, rakkhatha manindriyaṃ, manindriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato tumhe, bhikkhave, indriyesu guttadvārā viharissatha, atha tumhehipi māro pāpimā nibbijja pakkamissati, otāraṃ alabhamāno—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When you live with your sense doors restrained, Māra will leave you disappointed, since he can’t find a vulnerability, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kummamhāva siṅgāloti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">just like the jackal left the tortoise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kummova aṅgāni sake kapāle, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant should collect their thoughts </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samodahaṃ bhikkhu manovitakke; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a tortoise draws its limbs into its shell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissito aññamaheṭhayāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Independent, not disturbing others, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbuto nūpavadeyya kañcī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">someone who’s extinguished wouldn’t blame anyone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
