<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.154-154. Indriyasampannasutta  - 154. Endowed With Faculties </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.154. 154. Indriyasampannasutta  - 154. Endowed With Faculties </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Navapurāṇavagga  - 15. The Old and the New </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘indriyasampanno, indriyasampanno’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of someone who is ‘accomplished regarding the faculties’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, indriyasampanno hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is someone accomplished regarding the faculties defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cakkhundriye ce, bhikkhu, udayabbayānupassī viharanto cakkhundriye nibbindati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, if someone meditates observing rise and fall in the eye faculty, they grow disillusioned with the eye faculty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhindriye ce, bhikkhu, udayabbayānupassī viharanto jivhindriye nibbindati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they meditate observing rise and fall in the ear faculty … nose faculty … tongue faculty … body faculty … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manindriye ce, bhikkhu, udayabbayānupassī viharanto manindriye nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind faculty, they grow disillusioned with the mind faculty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbindaṃ virajjati … pe … vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. … When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, bhikkhu, indriyasampanno hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how someone who is accomplished regarding the faculties is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
