<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.071-71. Paṭhamachaphassāyatanasutta  - 71. Six Fields of Contact (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.071. 71. Paṭhamachaphassāyatanasutta  - 71. Six Fields of Contact (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Migajālavagga  - 7. With Migajāla </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, anyone who doesn’t truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avusitaṃ tena brahmacariyaṃ, ārakā so imasmā dhammavinayā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">has not completed the spiritual journey and is far from this teaching and training.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etthāhaṃ, bhante, anassasaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Here, sir, I’m lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, bhante, channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I don’t truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, mendicant? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuṃ ‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassasī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Do you regard the eye like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, cakkhu ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṃ bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, mendicant! And regarding the eye, you will truly see clearly with right wisdom that: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esevanto dukkhassa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just this is the end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhaṃ ‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassasī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Do you regard the ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, jivhā ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṃ bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esevanto dukkhassa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manaṃ ‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassasī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Do you regard the mind like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, mano ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṃ bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, mendicant! And regarding the mind, you will truly see clearly with right wisdom that: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esevanto dukkhassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just this is the end of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
