<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.091-91. Dutiyaejāsutta  - 91. Turbulence (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.091. 91. Dutiyaejāsutta  - 91. Turbulence (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Channavagga  - 9. With Channa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ejā, bhikkhave, rogo, ejā gaṇḍo, ejā sallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, turbulence is a disease, turbulence is a boil, turbulence is a dart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, tathāgato anejo viharati vītasallo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the Realized One lives unperturbed, with dart drawn out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya ‘anejo vihareyyaṃ vītasallo’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, a mendicant might wish: ‘May I live unperturbed, with dart drawn out.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuṃ na maññeyya, cakkhusmiṃ na maññeyya, cakkhuto na maññeyya, cakkhu meti na maññeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">So let them not identify with the eye, let them not identify in the eye, let them not identify from the eye, let them not identify: ‘The eye is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpe na maññeyya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify with sights … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuviññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhusamphassaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṃ meti na maññeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify with the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact. Let them not identify in that, let them not identify from that, and let them not identify: ‘That is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi, bhikkhave, maññati, yasmiṃ maññati, yato maññati, yaṃ meti maññati, tato taṃ hoti aññathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For whatever you identify with, whatever you identify in, whatever you identify as, and whatever you identify to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavameva abhinandati … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jivhaṃ na maññeyya, jivhāya na maññeyya, jivhāto na maññeyya, jivhā meti na maññeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify with the ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rase na maññeyya … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāviññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāsamphassaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ jivhāsamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṃ meti na maññeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi, bhikkhave, maññati, yasmiṃ maññati, yato maññati, yaṃ meti maññati, tato taṃ hoti aññathā. Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavameva abhinandati … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manaṃ na maññeyya, manasmiṃ na maññeyya, manato na maññeyya, mano meti na maññeyya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify with the mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manoviññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manosamphassaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṃ meti na maññeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify with the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. Let them not identify in that, let them not identify as that, and let them not identify: ‘That is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi, bhikkhave, maññati, yasmiṃ maññati, yato maññati, yaṃ meti maññati, tato taṃ hoti aññathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For whatever you identify with, whatever you identify in, whatever you identify as, and whatever you identify to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavameva abhinandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, bhikkhave, khandhadhātuāyatanā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṃ meti na maññeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As far as the aggregates, elements, and sense fields extend, they don’t identify with that, they don’t identify in that, they don’t identify as that, and they don’t identify: ‘That is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ amaññamāno na kiñci loke upādiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not identifying, they don’t grasp at anything in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupādiyaṃ na paritassati. Aparitassaṃ paccattaññeva parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
