<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.136-136. Paṭhamarūpārāmasutta  - 136. Liking Sights (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.136. 136. Paṭhamarūpārāmasutta  - 136. Liking Sights (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Devadahavagga  - 14. At Devadaha </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpārāmā, bhikkhave, devamanussā rūparatā rūpasammuditā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, gods and humans like sights, they love them and enjoy them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpavipariṇāmavirāganirodhā dukkhā, bhikkhave, devamanussā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when sights perish, fade away, and cease, gods and humans live in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddārāmā, bhikkhave, devamanussā saddaratā saddasammuditā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gods and humans like sounds … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddavipariṇāmavirāganirodhā dukkhā, bhikkhave, devamanussā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gandhārāmā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rasārāmā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phoṭṭhabbārāmā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammārāmā, bhikkhave, devamanussā dhammaratā dhammasammuditā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts, they love them and enjoy them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammavipariṇāmavirāganirodhā dukkhā, bhikkhave, devamanussā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when thoughts perish, fade away, and cease, gods and humans live in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgato ca kho, bhikkhave, arahaṃ sammāsambuddho rūpānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ viditvā na rūpārāmo na rūparato na rūpasammudito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has truly understood the origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape of sights, so he doesn’t like, love, or enjoy them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpavipariṇāmavirāganirodhā sukho, bhikkhave, tathāgato viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When sights perish, fade away, and cease, the Realized One lives happily. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has truly understood the origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape of sounds … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gandhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rasānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phoṭṭhabbānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ viditvā na dhammārāmo, na dhammarato, na dhammasammudito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts, so he doesn’t like, love, or enjoy them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammavipariṇāmavirāganirodhā sukho, bhikkhave, tathāgato viharati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When thoughts perish, fade away, and cease, the Realized One lives happily.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpā saddā rasā gandhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sights, sounds, tastes, smells, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassā dhammā ca kevalā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches and thoughts, the lot of them—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iṭṭhā kantā manāpā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re likable, desirable, and pleasurable </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvatatthīti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as long as you can say that they exist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadevakassa lokassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In all the world with its gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ete vo sukhasammatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is reckoned as happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha cete nirujjhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And where they cease </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ tesaṃ dukkhasammataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is reckoned as suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhaṃ diṭṭhamariyebhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble ones have seen that happiness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkāyassa nirodhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is the cessation of identity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paccanīkamidaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who see </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbalokena passataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">contradict the whole world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ pare sukhato āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What others say is happiness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tadariyā āhu dukkhato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the noble ones say is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ pare dukkhato āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What others say is suffering </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tadariyā sukhato vidū. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the noble ones say is happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passa dhammaṃ durājānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">See, this teaching is hard to understand, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammūḷhettha aviddasu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">it confuses the ignorant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nivutānaṃ tamo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who don’t see are closed off; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">andhakāro apassataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for them, all is blind darkness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satañca vivaṭaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those who see are open; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āloko passatāmiva; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the good, it is light. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santike na vijānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Though it’s right there, the unskilled fools </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maggā dhammassa akovidā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t understand the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavarāgaparetebhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re mired in desire to be reborn, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavarāgānusārībhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">flowing along the stream of lives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māradheyyānupannehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">mired in Māra’s sovereignty: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāyaṃ dhammo susambudho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this teaching isn’t easy for them to understand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko nu aññatra mariyebhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who, apart from the noble ones, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Padaṃ sambuddhumarahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is qualified to understand this state? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ padaṃ sammadaññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’ve rightly understood it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbanti anāsavā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re extinguished without defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
