<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.162-162. Koṭṭhikaaniccasutta  - 162. With Koṭṭhita on Impermanence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.162. 162. Koṭṭhikaaniccasutta  - 162. With Koṭṭhita on Impermanence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Nandikkhayavagga  - 16. The End of Relishing </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahākoṭṭhiko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā koṭṭhiko bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita went up to the Buddha … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṃkhittena dhammaṃ desetu, yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, koṭṭhika, aniccaṃ tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, koṭṭhika, aniccaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is impermanent? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu kho, koṭṭhika, aniccaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpā aniccā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">sights, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhusamphasso anicco; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and eye contact are impermanent: you should give up desire for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi aniccaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also impermanent: you should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā aniccā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rasā aniccā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jivhāviññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jivhāsamphasso anicco; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ jivhāsamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi aniccaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano anicco; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammā aniccā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manoviññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manosamphasso anicco; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and mind contact are impermanent: you should give up desire for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi aniccaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also impermanent: you should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, koṭṭhika, aniccaṃ tatra te chando pahātabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is impermanent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
