<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.085-85. Suññatalokasutta  - 85. The World is Empty </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.085. 85. Suññatalokasutta  - 85. The World is Empty </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Channavagga  - 9. With Channa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando … pe … bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Venerable Ānanda … said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘suñño loko, suñño loko’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they say that ‘the world is empty’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, suñño lokoti vuccatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does the saying ‘the world is empty’ refer to?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yasmā ca kho, ānanda, suññaṃ attena vā attaniyena vā tasmā suñño lokoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, they say that ‘the world is empty’ because it’s empty of self or what belongs to self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, ānanda, suññaṃ attena vā attaniyena vā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is empty of self or what belongs to self? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu kho, ānanda, suññaṃ attena vā attaniyena vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpā suññā attena vā attaniyena vā, cakkhuviññāṇaṃ suññaṃ attena vā attaniyena vā, cakkhusamphasso suñño attena vā attaniyena vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact are empty of self or what belongs to self. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi suññaṃ attena vā attaniyena vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also empty of self or what belongs to self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, ānanda, suññaṃ attena vā attaniyena vā, tasmā suñño lokoti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say that ‘the world is empty’ because it’s empty of self or what belongs to self.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
