<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.237-237. Dutiyahatthapādopamasutta  - 237. The Simile of Hands and Feet (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.237. 237. Dutiyahatthapādopamasutta  - 237. The Simile of Hands and Feet (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Samuddavagga  - 18. The Ocean </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Hatthesu, bhikkhave, sati ādānanikkhepanaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when there are hands, there’s picking up and putting down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pādesu sati abhikkamapaṭikkamo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are feet, there’s coming and going. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pabbesu sati samiñjanapasāraṇaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are joints, there’s contracting and extending. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kucchismiṃ sati jighacchā pipāsā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there’s a belly, there’s hunger and thirst. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, cakkhusmiṃ sati cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati ajjhattaṃ sukhaṃ dukkhaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when there’s an eye, pleasure and pain arise internally conditioned by eye contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya sati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there’s an ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasmiṃ sati manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati ajjhattaṃ sukhaṃ dukkhaṃ … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind, pleasure and pain arise internally conditioned by mind contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthesu, bhikkhave, asati ādānanikkhepanaṃ na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are no hands, there’s no picking up and putting down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pādesu asati abhikkamapaṭikkamo na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are no feet, there’s no coming and going. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pabbesu asati samiñjanapasāraṇaṃ na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are no joints, there’s no contracting and extending. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kucchismiṃ asati jighacchā pipāsā na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there’s no belly, there’s no hunger and thirst. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, cakkhusmiṃ asati cakkhusamphassapaccayā nuppajjati ajjhattaṃ sukhaṃ dukkhaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when there’s no eye, pleasure and pain don’t arise internally conditioned by eye contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya asati jivhāsamphassapaccayā nuppajjati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there’s no ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasmiṃ asati manosamphassapaccayā nuppajjati ajjhattaṃ sukhaṃ dukkhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind, pleasure and pain don’t arise internally conditioned by mind contact.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuddavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve samuddā bāḷisiko, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khīrarukkhena koṭṭhiko; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmabhū udāyī ceva, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādittena ca aṭṭhamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthapādūpamā dveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaggo tena pavuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
