<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.233-233. Kāmabhūsutta  - 233. With Kāmabhū </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.233. 233. Kāmabhūsutta  - 233. With Kāmabhū </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Samuddavagga  - 18. The Ocean </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca ānando āyasmā ca kāmabhū kosambiyaṃ viharanti ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the venerables Ānanda and Kāmabhū were staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā kāmabhū sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā ānandena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Kāmabhū came out of retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā kāmabhū āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho, āvuso ānanda, cakkhu rūpānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, rūpā cakkhussa saṃyojanaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Ānanda, which is it? Is the eye the fetter of sights, or are sights the fetter of the eye? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā rasānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, rasā jivhāya saṃyojanaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is the ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano dhammānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, dhammā manassa saṃyojanan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind the fetter of thoughts, or are thoughts the fetter of the mind?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, āvuso kāmabhū, cakkhu rūpānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, na rūpā cakkhussa saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Kāmabhū, the eye is not the fetter of sights, nor are sights the fetter of the eye. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañca tattha tadubhayaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandarāgo, taṃ tattha saṃyojanaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jivhā rasānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, na rasā jivhāya saṃyojanaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na mano dhammānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, na dhammā manassa saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind is not the fetter of thoughts, nor are thoughts the fetter of the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañca tattha tadubhayaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandarāgo taṃ tattha saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, āvuso, kāḷo ca balībaddo odāto ca balībaddo ekena dāmena vā yottena vā saṃyuttā assu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a black ox and a white ox yoked by a single harness or yoke. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo nu kho evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Would it be right to say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kāḷo balībaddo odātassa balībaddassa saṃyojanaṃ, odāto balībaddo kāḷassa balībaddassa saṃyojanan’ti, sammā nu kho so vadamāno vadeyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">the black ox is the yoke of the white ox, or the white ox is the yoke of the black ox?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, āvuso”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, reverend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, āvuso, kāḷo balībaddo odātassa balībaddassa saṃyojanaṃ, napi odāto balībaddo kāḷassa balībaddassa saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The black ox is not the yoke of the white ox, nor is the white ox the yoke of the black ox. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena ca kho te ekena dāmena vā yottena vā saṃyuttā, taṃ tattha saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The yoke there is the single harness or yoke that they’re yoked by.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, āvuso, na cakkhu rūpānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, na rūpā cakkhussa saṃyojanaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, the eye is not the fetter of sights, nor are sights the fetter of the eye. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jivhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na mano … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind is not the fetter of thoughts, nor are thoughts the fetter of the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca tattha tadubhayaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandarāgo, taṃ tattha saṃyojanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
