<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.130-130. Hāliddikānisutta  - 130. With Hāliddikāni </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.130. 130. Hāliddikānisutta  - 130. With Hāliddikāni </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gahapativagga  - 13. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā mahākaccāno avantīsu viharati kuraraghare papāte pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land of the Avantis near Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho hāliddikāni gahapati yenāyasmā mahākaccāno tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho hāliddikāni gahapati āyasmantaṃ mahākaccānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Hāliddikāni went up to Venerable Mahākaccāna … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vuttamidaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, this was said by the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṃ; phassanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ nu kho, bhante, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṃ; phassanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, gahapati, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā ‘manāpaṃ itthetan’ti pajānāti cakkhuviññāṇaṃ sukhavedaniyañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, it’s when a mendicant sees a sight and understands it to be agreeable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is eye consciousness; and pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhunā kho paneva rūpaṃ disvā ‘amanāpaṃ itthetan’ti pajānāti cakkhuviññāṇaṃ dukkhavedaniyañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they see a sight and understand it to be disagreeable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is eye consciousness; and painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhunā kho paneva rūpaṃ disvā ‘upekkhāṭṭhāniyaṃ itthetan’ti pajānāti cakkhuviññāṇaṃ adukkhamasukhavedaniyañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they see a sight and understand it to be a basis for equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is eye consciousness; and neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, gahapati, bhikkhu sotena saddaṃ sutvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant hears a sound with the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells an odor with the nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes a flavor with the tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feels a touch with the body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya ‘manāpaṃ itthetan’ti pajānāti manoviññāṇaṃ sukhavedaniyañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">knows a thought with the mind and understands it to be agreeable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is mind consciousness; and pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manasā kho paneva dhammaṃ viññāya ‘amanāpaṃ itthetan’ti pajānāti manoviññāṇaṃ dukkhavedaniyañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they know a thought and understand it to be disagreeable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is mind consciousness; and painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manasā kho paneva dhammaṃ viññāya ‘upekkhāṭṭhāniyaṃ itthetan’ti pajānāti manoviññāṇaṃ adukkhamasukhavedaniyañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they know a thought and understand it to be a basis for equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṃ; phassanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
