<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.094-94. Adantaaguttasutta  - 94. Untamed, Unguarded </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.094. 94. Adantaaguttasutta  - 94. Untamed, Unguarded </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Saḷavagga  - 10. The Sixes </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chayime, bhikkhave, phassāyatanā adantā aguttā arakkhitā asaṃvutā dukkhādhivāhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these six fields of contact bring suffering when they’re untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṃ adantaṃ aguttaṃ arakkhitaṃ asaṃvutaṃ dukkhādhivāhaṃ hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The field of eye contact brings suffering when it’s untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṃ adantaṃ aguttaṃ arakkhitaṃ asaṃvutaṃ dukkhādhivāhaṃ hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The field of ear contact … nose contact … tongue contact … body contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṃ adantaṃ aguttaṃ arakkhitaṃ asaṃvutaṃ dukkhādhivāhaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The field of mind contact brings suffering when it’s untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha phassāyatanā adantā aguttā arakkhitā asaṃvutā dukkhādhivāhā honti”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These six fields of contact bring suffering when they’re untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, phassāyatanā sudantā suguttā surakkhitā susaṃvutā sukhādhivāhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These six fields of contact bring happiness when they’re well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṃ sudantaṃ suguttaṃ surakkhitaṃ susaṃvutaṃ sukhādhivāhaṃ hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The field of eye contact brings happiness when it’s well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṃ sudantaṃ suguttaṃ surakkhitaṃ susaṃvutaṃ sukhādhivāhaṃ hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The field of ear contact … nose contact … tongue contact … body contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṃ sudantaṃ suguttaṃ surakkhitaṃ susaṃvutaṃ sukhādhivāhaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The field of mind contact brings happiness when it’s well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha phassāyatanā sudantā suguttā surakkhitā susaṃvutā sukhādhivāhā hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These six fields of contact bring happiness when they’re well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saḷeva phassāyatanāni bhikkhavo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, it’s just the six fields of contact </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṃvuto yattha dukkhaṃ nigacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that lead the unrestrained to suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesañca ye saṃvaraṇaṃ avedisuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who understand how to restrain them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhādutiyā viharantānavassutā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">live with faith as partner, uncorrupted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna rūpāni manoramāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’ve seen pleasant sights </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athopi disvāna amanoramāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and unpleasant ones, too, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manorame rāgapathaṃ vinodaye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">get rid of desire for the pleasant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāppiyaṃ meti manaṃ padosaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">without hating what you don’t like. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddañca sutvā dubhayaṃ piyāppiyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’ve heard sounds both liked and disliked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyamhi sadde na samucchito siyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t fall under the thrall of sounds you like, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athoppiye dosagataṃ vinodaye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">get rid of hate for the unliked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāppiyaṃ meti manaṃ padosaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and don’t hurt your mind by thinking of what you don’t like. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gandhañca ghatvā surabhiṃ manoramaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’ve smelled a pleasant, fragrant scent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athopi ghatvā asuciṃ akantiyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and one that’s foul and unpleasant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akantiyasmiṃ paṭighaṃ vinodaye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">get rid of aversion for the unpleasant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandānunīto na ca kantiye siyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while not yielding to desire for the pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rasañca bhotvāna asāditañca sāduṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’ve enjoyed a sweet, delicious taste, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athopi bhotvāna asādumekadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sometimes those that are bitter, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāduṃ rasaṃ nājjhosāya bhuñje, </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t be attached to enjoying sweet tastes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Virodhamāsādusu nopadaṃsaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and don’t despise the bitter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassena phuṭṭho na sukhena majje, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t be intoxicated by a pleasant touch, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhena phuṭṭhopi na sampavedhe; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and don’t tremble at a painful touch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassadvayaṃ sukhadukkhe upekkhe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Look with equanimity at the duality of pleasant and painful contacts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anānuruddho aviruddha kenaci. </span></p>
<p class="p3">without favoring or opposing anything. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Papañcasaññā itarītarā narā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">People generally let their perceptions proliferate; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Papañcayantā upayanti saññino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">perceiving and proliferating, they are attracted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manomayaṃ gehasitañca sabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’ve dispelled all thoughts of the lay life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Panujja nekkhammasitaṃ irīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wander intent on renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mano chassu yadā subhāvito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the mind is well developed like this regarding the six, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phuṭṭhassa cittaṃ na vikampate kvaci; </span></p>
<p class="p3">it doesn’t waver at contacts at all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te rāgadose abhibhuyya bhikkhavo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, those who have mastered greed and hate </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavattha jātimaraṇassa pāragā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">go beyond birth and death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
