<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.163-163. Koṭṭhikadukkhasutta  - 163. With Koṭṭhita on Suffering </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.163. 163. Koṭṭhikadukkhasutta  - 163. With Koṭṭhita on Suffering </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Nandikkhayavagga  - 16. The End of Relishing </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahākoṭṭhiko … pe … bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita … said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante … pe … vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, koṭṭhika, dukkhaṃ tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, koṭṭhika, dukkhaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is suffering? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu kho, koṭṭhika, dukkhaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpā dukkhā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">sights, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññāṇaṃ dukkhaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhusamphasso dukkho; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and eye contact are suffering: you should give up desire for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi dukkhaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also suffering; you should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā dukkhā; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano dukkho; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammā dukkhā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manoviññāṇaṃ dukkhaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manosamphasso dukkho; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and mind contact are suffering: you should give up desire for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi dukkhaṃ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also suffering: you should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, koṭṭhika, dukkhaṃ tatra te chando pahātabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
