<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.145-145. Bāhirānattahetusutta  - 145. Exterior and Cause Are Not-Self </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.145. 145. Bāhirānattahetusutta  - 145. Exterior and Cause Are Not-Self </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Devadahavagga  - 14. At Devadaha </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpā, bhikkhave, anattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, sights are not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo rūpānaṃ uppādāya, sopi anattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cause and condition that gives rise to sights is also not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anattasambhūtā, bhikkhave, rūpā kuto attā bhavissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since sights are produced by what is not-self, how could they be self? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sounds … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gandhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smells … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rasā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tastes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phoṭṭhabbā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammā anattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thoughts are not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo dhammānaṃ uppādāya, sopi anattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cause and condition that gives rise to thoughts is also not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anattasambhūtā, bhikkhave, dhammā kuto attā bhavissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since thoughts are produced by what is not-self, how could they be self? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpesupi nibbindati, saddesupi … gandhesupi … rasesupi … phoṭṭhabbesupi … dhammesupi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devadahavaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devadaho khaṇo rūpā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve natumhākameva ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hetunāpi tayo vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duve ajjhattabāhirāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
