<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.074-74. Paṭhamagilānasutta  - 74. Sick (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.074. 74. Paṭhamagilānasutta  - 74. Sick (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Gilānavagga  - 8. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“amukasmiṃ, bhante, vihāre aññataro bhikkhu navo appaññāto ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, in such and such a monastery there’s a mendicant who is junior and not well-known. He’s sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhante, bhagavā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go to him out of compassion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā navavādañca sutvā gilānavādañca, “appaññāto bhikkhū”ti iti viditvā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha heard that the mendicant was junior and ill, understanding that he was not well-known, he went to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That mendicant saw the Buddha coming off in the distance </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and tried to rise on his cot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said to that monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṃ, bhikkhu, mā tvaṃ mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s all right, mendicant, don’t get up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santimāni āsanāni paññattāni, tatthāhaṃ nisīdissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some seats spread out, I will sit there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdi bhagavā paññatte āsane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He sat on the seat spread out </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to the mendicant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci te, bhikkhu, khamanīyaṃ, kacci yāpanīyaṃ, kacci dukkhā vedanā paṭikkamanti no abhikkamanti, paṭikkamosānaṃ paññāyati no abhikkamo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you’re keeping well, mendicant; I hope you’re alright. I hope that your pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ, na yāpanīyaṃ, bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā abhikkamanti no paṭikkamanti, abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati no paṭikkamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not alright. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci te, bhikkhu, na kiñci kukkuccaṃ, na koci vippaṭisāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you don’t have any remorse or regret?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha me, bhante, anappakaṃ kukkuccaṃ, anappako vippaṭisāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, sir, I have no little remorse and regret.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci pana taṃ, bhikkhu, attā sīlato upavadatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you have no reason to blame yourself when it comes to ethical conduct?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho maṃ, bhante, attā sīlato upavadatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No sir, I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No ce kira te, bhikkhu, attā sīlato upavadati, atha kiñca te kukkuccaṃ ko ca vippaṭisāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, mendicant, why do you have remorse and regret?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvāhaṃ, bhante, sīlavisuddhatthaṃ bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because I understand that the Buddha has not taught the Dhamma merely for the sake of ethical purity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No ce kira tvaṃ, bhikkhu, sīlavisuddhatthaṃ mayā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāsi, atha kimatthaṃ carahi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If that is so, what exactly do you understand to be the purpose of teaching the Dhamma?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rāgavirāgatthaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I understand that the Buddha has taught the Dhamma for the purpose of the fading away of greed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, mendicant! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, rāgavirāgatthaṃ mayā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good that you understand that I’ve taught the Dhamma for the purpose of the fading away of greed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgavirāgattho hi, bhikkhu, mayā dhammo desito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For that is indeed the purpose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicant? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhu niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is the eye permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“… pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano nicco vā anicco vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anicco, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suffering, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and liable to fall apart, is it fit to be regarded thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhu, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati, sotasmimpi nibbindati … pe … manasmimpi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti … pe … nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended … there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamano so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, that mendicant was happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imasmiñca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne tassa bhikkhuno virajaṃ vītamalaṃ dhammacakkhuṃ udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And while this discourse was being spoken, the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in that mendicant: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yaṃ kiñci samudayadhammaṃ sabbaṃ taṃ nirodhadhamman”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Everything that has a beginning has an end.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
