<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.120-120. Sāriputtasaddhivihārikasutta  - 120. Sāriputta and the Pupil </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.120. 120. Sāriputtasaddhivihārikasutta  - 120. Sāriputta and the Pupil </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Lokakāmaguṇavagga  - 12. The World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā sāriputto sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a certain mendicant went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saddhivihāriko, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu sikkhaṃ paccakkhāya hīnāyāvatto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, a mendicant pupil of mine has rejected the training and returned to a lesser life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, āvuso, hoti indriyesu aguttadvārassa, bhojane amattaññuno, jāgariyaṃ ananuyuttassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s how it is, reverend, when someone doesn’t guard the sense doors, eats too much, and is not committed to wakefulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘So vatāvuso, bhikkhu indriyesu aguttadvāro bhojane amattaññū jāgariyaṃ ananuyutto yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ santānessatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not possible for such a mendicant to maintain the full and pure spiritual life for the rest of their life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘So vatāvuso, bhikkhu indriyesu guttadvāro, bhojane mattaññū, jāgariyaṃ anuyutto yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ santānessatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for a mendicant to maintain the full and pure spiritual life for the rest of their life if they guard the sense doors, eat in moderation, and are committed to wakefulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcāvuso, indriyesu guttadvāro hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does someone guard the sense doors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant sees a sight with the eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati, rakkhati cakkhundriyaṃ, cakkhundriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear a sound with their ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they smell an odor with their nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they taste a flavor with their tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they feel a touch with their body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they know a thought with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati, rakkhati manindriyaṃ, manindriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, āvuso, indriyesu guttadvāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone guards the sense doors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcāvuso, bhojane mattaññū hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does someone eat in moderation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu paṭisaṅkhā yoniso āhāraṃ āhāreti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant reflects properly on the food that they eat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘neva davāya, na madāya, na maṇḍanāya, na vibhūsanāya, yāvadeva imassa kāyassa ṭhitiyā yāpanāya, vihiṃsūparatiyā, brahmacariyānuggahāya. Iti purāṇañca vedanaṃ paṭihaṅkhāmi, navañca vedanaṃ na uppādessāmi, yātrā ca me bhavissati, anavajjatā ca phāsuvihāro cā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will live blamelessly and at ease.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, āvuso, bhojane mattaññū hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone eats in moderation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcāvuso, jāgariyaṃ anuyutto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is someone committed to wakefulness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu divasaṃ caṅkamena nisajjāya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind from obstacles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattiyā paṭhamaṃ yāmaṃ caṅkamena nisajjāya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the evening, they continue to practice walking and sitting meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattiyā majjhimaṃ yāmaṃ dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyyaṃ kappeti pāde pādaṃ accādhāya sato sampajāno, uṭṭhānasaññaṃ manasi karitvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the middle of the night, they lie down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattiyā pacchimaṃ yāmaṃ paccuṭṭhāya caṅkamena nisajjāya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the last part of the night, they get up and continue to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, āvuso, jāgariyaṃ anuyutto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone is committed to wakefulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihāvuso, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘indriyesu guttadvārā bhavissāma, bhojane mattaññuno, jāgariyaṃ anuyuttā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will guard the sense doors, eat in moderation, and be committed to wakefulness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, āvuso, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
