<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.119-119. Pañcasikhasutta  - 119. The Question of Pañcasikha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.119. 119. Pañcasikhasutta  - 119. The Question of Pañcasikha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Lokakāmaguṇavagga  - 12. The World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho pañcasikho gandhabbadevaputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho pañcasikho gandhabbadevaputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then the fairy Pañcasikha went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Santi kho, pañcasikha, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Pañcasikha, there are sights known by the eye … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi kho, pañcasikha, manoviññeyyā dhammā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato tannissitaṃ viññāṇaṃ hoti tadupādānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their consciousness relies on that and grasps it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saupādāno, pañcasikha, bhikkhu no parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with grasping does not become extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, pañcasikha, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi ca kho, pañcasikha, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sights known by the eye … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi kho, pañcasikha, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati, tassa taṃ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato na tannissitaṃ viññāṇaṃ hoti, na tadupādānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn’t rely on that and grasp it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupādāno, pañcasikha, bhikkhu parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant free of grasping becomes extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, pañcasikha, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
