<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.031-31. Paṭhamasamugghātasappāyasutta  - 31. The Practice Conducive to Uprooting (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.031. 31. Paṭhamasamugghātasappāyasutta  - 31. The Practice Conducive to Uprooting (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sabbavagga  - 3. All </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sabbamaññitasamugghātasappāyaṃ vo, bhikkhave, paṭipadaṃ desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all identifying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca sā, bhikkhave, sabbamaññitasamugghātasappāyā paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all identifying? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhuṃ na maññati, cakkhusmiṃ na maññati, cakkhuto na maññati, cakkhuṃ meti na maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant does not identify with the eye, does not identify in the eye, does not identify from the eye, and does not identify: ‘The eye is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpe na maññati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t identify with sights … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuviññāṇaṃ na maññati, cakkhusamphassaṃ na maññati, yampidaṃ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi na maññati, tasmimpi na maññati, tatopi na maññati, taṃ meti na maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye consciousness … eye contact. And they don’t identify with the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact. They don’t identify in that, they don’t identify from that, and they don’t identify: ‘That is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi, bhikkhave, maññati, yasmiṃ maññati, yato maññati, yaṃ meti maññati, tato taṃ hoti aññathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For whatever you identify with, whatever you identify in, whatever you identify as, and whatever you identify as ‘mine’: that becomes something else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavamevābhinandati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhaṃ na maññati, jivhāya na maññati, jivhāto na maññati, jivhā meti na maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t identify with the ear … nose … tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rase na maññati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāviññāṇaṃ na maññati, jivhāsamphassaṃ na maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ jivhāsamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi na maññati, tasmimpi na maññati, tatopi na maññati, taṃ meti na maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi, bhikkhave, maññati, yasmiṃ maññati, yato maññati, yaṃ meti maññati, tato taṃ hoti aññathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavamevābhinandati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manaṃ na maññati, manasmiṃ na maññati, manato na maññati, mano meti na maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme na maññati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manoviññāṇaṃ na maññati, manosamphassaṃ na maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi na maññati, tasmimpi na maññati, tatopi na maññati, taṃ meti na maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t identify with the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. They don’t identify in that, they don’t identify from that, and they don’t identify: ‘That is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi, bhikkhave, maññati, yasmiṃ maññati, yato maññati, yaṃ meti maññati, tato taṃ hoti aññathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For whatever you identify with, whatever you identify in, whatever you identify as, and whatever you identify as ‘mine’: that becomes something else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavamevābhinandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, bhikkhave, khandhadhātuāyatanaṃ tampi na maññati, tasmimpi na maññati, tatopi na maññati, taṃ meti na maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As far as the aggregates, elements, and sense fields extend, they don’t identify with that, they don’t identify in that, they don’t identify from that, and they don’t identify: ‘That is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ amaññamāno na ca kiñci loke upādiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not identifying, they don’t grasp at anything in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupādiyaṃ na paritassati. Aparitassaṃ paccattaññeva parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho sā, bhikkhave, sabbamaññitasamugghātasappāyā paṭipadā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all identifying.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
