<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.146-146. Kammanirodhasutta  - 146. The Cessation of Action </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.146. 146. Kammanirodhasutta  - 146. The Cessation of Action </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Navapurāṇavagga  - 15. The Old and the New </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navapurāṇāni, bhikkhave, kammāni desessāmi kammanirodhaṃ kammanirodhagāminiñca paṭipadaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you old action, new action, the cessation of action, and the practice that leads to the cessation of action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, purāṇakammaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is old action? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu, bhikkhave, purāṇakammaṃ abhisaṅkhataṃ abhisañcetayitaṃ vedaniyaṃ daṭṭhabbaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye is old action. It should be seen as produced by choices and intentions, as something to be felt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā purāṇakammā abhisaṅkhatā abhisañcetayitā vedaniyā daṭṭhabbā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano purāṇakammo abhisaṅkhato abhisañcetayito vedaniyo daṭṭhabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind is old action. It should be seen as produced by choices and intentions, as something to be felt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, purāṇakammaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called old action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, navakammaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is new action? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, etarahi kammaṃ karoti kāyena vācāya manasā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deeds you currently perform by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, navakammaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called new action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kammanirodho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the cessation of action? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, bhikkhave, kāyakammavacīkammamanokammassa nirodhā vimuttiṃ phusati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you experience freedom due to the cessation of deeds by body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammanirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the cessation of action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, kammanirodhagāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the practice that leads to the cessation of action? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi, sammāsaṅkappo, sammāvācā, sammākammanto, sammāājīvo, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati, sammāsamādhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammanirodhagāminī paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, desitaṃ mayā purāṇakammaṃ, desitaṃ navakammaṃ, desito kammanirodho, desitā kammanirodhagāminī paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, mendicants, I’ve taught you old action, new action, the cessation of action, and the practice that leads to the cessation of action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, satthārā karaṇīyaṃ sāvakānaṃ hitesinā anukampakena anukampaṃ upādāya, kataṃ vo taṃ mayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Out of compassion, I’ve done what a teacher should do who wants what’s best for their disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etāni, bhikkhave, rukkhamūlāni, etāni suññāgārāni. Jhāyatha, bhikkhave, mā pamādattha; mā pacchāvippaṭisārino ahuvattha. Ayaṃ vo amhākaṃ anusāsanī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here are these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don’t be negligent! Don’t regret it later! This is my instruction to you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
