<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.123-123. Upādāniyadhammasutta  - 123. Things Prone to Being Grasped </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.123. 123. Upādāniyadhammasutta  - 123. Things Prone to Being Grasped </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Lokakāmaguṇavagga  - 12. The World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Upādāniye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi upādānañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the things that are prone to being grasped, and the grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā, katamañca upādānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the things that are prone to being grasped? And what is the grasping? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that are prone to being grasped. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo tattha chandarāgo, taṃ tattha upādānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The desire and greed for them is the grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that are prone to being grasped. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo tattha chandarāgo taṃ tattha upādānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The desire and greed for them is the grasping.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokakāmaguṇavaggo dutiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mārapāsena dve vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lokakāmaguṇena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakko pañcasikho ceva, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāriputto ca rāhulo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojanaṃ upādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaggo tena pavuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
