<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.164-164. Koṭṭhikaanattasutta  - 164. With Koṭṭhita on Not-Self </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.164. 164. Koṭṭhikaanattasutta  - 164. With Koṭṭhita on Not-Self </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Nandikkhayavagga  - 16. The End of Relishing </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vihareyyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, koṭṭhika, anattā tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, koṭṭhika, anattā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is not-self? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu kho, koṭṭhika, anattā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpā anattā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">sights, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññāṇaṃ anattā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhusamphasso anattā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and eye contact are not-self: you should give up desire for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi anattā; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also not-self: You should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā anattā; tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano anattā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammā anattā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manoviññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manosamphasso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">and mind contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi anattā; tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also not-self: you should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, koṭṭhika, anattā, tatra te chando pahātabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is not-self.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
