<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.127-127. Bhāradvājasutta  - 127. With Bhāradvāja </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.127. 127. Bhāradvājasutta  - 127. With Bhāradvāja </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gahapativagga  - 13. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā piṇḍolabhāradvājo kosambiyaṃ viharati ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja was staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā udeno yenāyasmā piṇḍolabhāradvājo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā piṇḍolabhāradvājena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Udena went up to Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā udeno āyasmantaṃ piṇḍolabhāradvājaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bho bhāradvāja, hetu ko paccayo yenime daharā bhikkhū susū kāḷakesā bhadrena yobbanena samannāgatā paṭhamena vayasā anikīḷitāvino kāmesu yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ caranti, addhānañca āpādentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Bhāradvāja, there are these young monks who are youthful, black-haired, blessed with youth, in the prime of life; and they’ve never played around with sensual pleasures. What is the cause, what is the reason why they practice the full and pure spiritual life as long as they live, maintaining it for a long time?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vuttaṃ kho etaṃ, mahārāja, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, this has been stated by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etha tumhe, bhikkhave, mātumattīsu mātucittaṃ upaṭṭhapetha, bhaginimattīsu bhaginicittaṃ upaṭṭhapetha, dhītumattīsu dhītucittaṃ upaṭṭhapethā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, monks, think of women your mother’s age as your mother. Think of women your sister’s age as your sister. And think of women your daughter’s age as your daughter.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, mahārāja, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo yenime daharā bhikkhū susū kāḷakesā bhadrena yobbanena samannāgatā paṭhamena vayasā anikīḷitāvino kāmesu yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ caranti, addhānañca āpādentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a cause, great king, this is a reason why these young monks practice the full and pure spiritual life as long as they live, maintaining it for a long time.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lolaṃ kho, bho bhāradvāja, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Master Bhāradvāja, the mind is wanton. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appekadā mātumattīsupi lobhadhammā uppajjanti, bhaginimattīsupi lobhadhammā uppajjanti, dhītumattīsupi lobhadhammā uppajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sometimes thoughts of desire come up even for women your mother’s age, your sister’s age, or your daughter’s age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi nu kho, bho bhāradvāja, añño ca hetu, añño ca paccayo yenime daharā bhikkhū susū kāḷakesā … pe … addhānañca āpādentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is there another cause, another reason why these young monks live the full and pure spiritual life for their entire life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vuttaṃ kho etaṃ, mahārāja, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, this has been stated by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etha tumhe, bhikkhave, imameva kāyaṃ uddhaṃ pādatalā adho kesamatthakā tacapariyantaṃ pūraṃ nānappakārassa asucino paccavekkhatha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, monks, examine your own body up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi imasmiṃ kāye kesā lomā nakhā dantā taco maṃsaṃ nhāru aṭṭhi aṭṭhimiñjaṃ vakkaṃ hadayaṃ yakanaṃ kilomakaṃ pihakaṃ papphāsaṃ antaṃ antaguṇaṃ udariyaṃ karīsaṃ pittaṃ semhaṃ pubbo lohitaṃ sedo medo assu vasā kheḷo siṅghāṇikā lasikā muttan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this body there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, mahārāja, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo yenime daharā bhikkhū susū kāḷakesā … pe … addhānañca āpādentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is also a cause, great king, this is a reason why these young monks live the full and pure spiritual life for their entire life, maintaining it for a long time.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, bho bhāradvāja, bhikkhū bhāvitakāyā bhāvitasīlā bhāvitacittā bhāvitapaññā, tesaṃ taṃ sukaraṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is easy to do for those mendicants who have developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho te, bho bhāradvāja, bhikkhū abhāvitakāyā abhāvitasīlā abhāvitacittā abhāvitapaññā, tesaṃ taṃ dukkaraṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it’s hard to do for those mendicants who have not developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appekadā, bho bhāradvāja, asubhato manasi karissāmīti subhatova āgacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sometimes I plan to focus on something as ugly, but only its beauty comes to mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi nu kho, bho bhāradvāja, añño ca kho hetu añño ca paccayo yenime daharā bhikkhū susū kāḷakesā … pe … addhānañca āpādentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is there another cause, another reason why these young monks live the full and pure spiritual life for their entire life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vuttaṃ kho etaṃ, mahārāja, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, this has been stated by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etha tumhe, bhikkhave, indriyesu guttadvārā viharatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, monks, live with sense doors guarded. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā mā nimittaggāhino ahuvattha, mānubyañjanaggāhino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you see a sight with your eyes, don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjatha. Rakkhatha cakkhundriyaṃ; cakkhundriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protect the faculty of sight, and achieve its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you hear a sound with your ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you smell an odor with your nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you taste a flavor with your tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you feel a touch with your body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya mā nimittaggāhino ahuvattha, mānubyañjanaggāhino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you know a thought with your mind, don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjatha. Rakkhatha manindriyaṃ; manindriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjathā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protect the faculty of mind, and achieve its restraint.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, mahārāja, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yenime daharā bhikkhū susū kāḷakesā bhadrena yobbanena samannāgatā paṭhamena vayasā anikīḷitāvino kāmesu yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ caranti, addhānañca āpādentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is also a cause, great king, this is a reason why these young monks practice the full and pure spiritual life as long as they live, maintaining it for a long time.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bho bhāradvāja; abbhutaṃ, bho bhāradvāja. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, Master Bhāradvāja, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva subhāsitañcidaṃ, bho bhāradvāja, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How well this was said by the Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esova kho, bho bhāradvāja, hetu, esa paccayo yenime daharā bhikkhū susū kāḷakesā bhadrena yobbanena samannāgatā paṭhamena vayasā anikīḷitāvino kāmesu yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ caranti, addhānañca āpādentīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the real cause, this is the reason why these young monks practice the full and pure spiritual life as long as they live, maintaining it for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampi kho, bho bhāradvāja, yasmiṃ samaye arakkhiteneva kāyena, arakkhitāya vācāya, arakkhitena cittena, anupaṭṭhitāya satiyā, asaṃvutehi indriyehi antepuraṃ pavisāmi, ativiya maṃ tasmiṃ samaye lobhadhammā parisahanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For sometimes I too enter the harem with unprotected body, speech, mind, mindfulness, and sense faculties. At those times powerful thoughts of desire get the better of me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiñca khvāhaṃ, bho bhāradvāja, samaye rakkhiteneva kāyena, rakkhitāya vācāya, rakkhitena cittena, upaṭṭhitāya satiyā, saṃvutehi indriyehi antepuraṃ pavisāmi, na maṃ tathā tasmiṃ samaye lobhadhammā parisahanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But sometimes I enter the harem with protected body, speech, mind, mindfulness, and sense faculties. At those times such thoughts of desire don’t get the better of me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkantaṃ, bho bhāradvāja, abhikkantaṃ, bho bhāradvāja. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, Master Bhāradvāja! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho bhāradvāja, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā bhāradvājena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Bhāradvāja has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ, bho bhāradvāja, taṃ bhagavantaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi, dhammañca, bhikkhusaṃghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ bhāradvājo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Bhāradvāja remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
