<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.230-230. Bāḷisikopamasutta  - 230. The Simile of the Fisherman </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.230. 230. Bāḷisikopamasutta  - 230. The Simile of the Fisherman </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Samuddavagga  - 18. The Ocean </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, bāḷisiko āmisagatabaḷisaṃ gambhīre udakarahade pakkhipeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose a fisherman was to cast a baited hook into a deep lake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ aññataro āmisacakkhu maccho gileyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing the bait, a fish would swallow it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, maccho gilitabaḷiso bāḷisikassa anayaṃ āpanno byasanaṃ āpanno yathākāmakaraṇīyo bāḷisikassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so the fish that swallowed the hook would meet with tragedy and disaster, and the fisherman can do what he wants with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, chayime baḷisā lokasmiṃ anayāya sattānaṃ vadhāya pāṇinaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are these six hooks in the world that mean tragedy and slaughter for living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce, bhikkhu, abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu gilitabaḷiso, mārassa anayaṃ āpanno byasanaṃ āpanno yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called a mendicant who has swallowed Māra’s hook. They’ve met with tragedy and disaster, and the Wicked One can do what he wants with them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce, bhikkhu, abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu gilitabaḷiso mārassa anayaṃ āpanno byasanaṃ āpanno yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called a mendicant who has swallowed Māra’s hook. They’ve met with tragedy and disaster, and the Wicked One can do what he wants with them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi ca, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce, bhikkhu, nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na gilitabaḷiso mārassa abhedi baḷisaṃ paribhedi baḷisaṃ na anayaṃ āpanno na byasanaṃ āpanno na yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they’re called a mendicant who hasn’t swallowed Māra’s hook. They’ve broken the hook, destroyed it. They haven’t met with tragedy and disaster, and the Wicked One cannot do what he wants with them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na gilitabaḷiso mārassa abhedi baḷisaṃ paribhedi baḷisaṃ na anayaṃ āpanno na byasanaṃ āpanno na yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they’re called a mendicant who hasn’t swallowed Māra’s hook. They’ve broken the hook, destroyed it. They haven’t met with tragedy and disaster, and the Wicked One cannot do what he wants with them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
