<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.076-76. Rādhaaniccasutta  - 76. With Rādha on Impermanence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.076. 76. Rādhaaniccasutta  - 76. With Rādha on Impermanence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Gilānavagga  - 8. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā rādho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Venerable Rādha went up to the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā rādho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṃkhittena dhammaṃ desetu, yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, rādha, aniccaṃ tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rādha, you should give up desire for what is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, rādha, aniccaṃ tatra te chando pahātabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is impermanent? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu aniccaṃ, rūpā aniccā, cakkhuviññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye, sights, eye consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhusamphasso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">and eye contact are impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi aniccaṃ. Tatra te chando pahātabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also impermanent. You should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano anicco. Tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manoviññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manosamphasso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">and mind contact are impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi aniccaṃ. Tatra te chando pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also impermanent. You should give up desire for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, rādha, aniccaṃ tatra te chando pahātabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should give up desire for what is impermanent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
