<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.07-7. Paṭhamagelaññasutta  - 7. The Infirmary (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.07. 7. Paṭhamagelaññasutta  - 7. The Infirmary (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sagāthāvagga  - 1. With Verses </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena gilānasālā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the infirmary, where he sat down on the seat spread out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sato, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sampajāno kālaṃ āgameyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant should await their time mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vo amhākaṃ anusāsanī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is my instruction to you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant mindful? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu vedanānupassī viharati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte cittānupassī viharati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of the mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is mindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sampajāno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant aware? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu abhikkante paṭikkante sampajānakārī hoti, ālokite vilokite sampajānakārī hoti, samiñjite pasārite sampajānakārī hoti, saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇe sampajānakārī hoti, asite pīte khāyite sāyite sampajānakārī hoti, uccārapassāvakamme sampajānakārī hoti, gate ṭhite nisinne sutte jāgarite bhāsite tuṇhībhāve sampajānakārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sampajānakārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant acts with situational awareness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sato, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sampajāno kālaṃ āgameyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant should await their time mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vo amhākaṃ anusāsanī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is my instruction to you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno evaṃ satassa sampajānassa appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato uppajjati sukhā vedanā, so evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">While a mendicant is meditating like this—mindful, aware, diligent, keen, and resolute—if pleasant feelings arise, they understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘uppannā kho myāyaṃ sukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A pleasant feeling has arisen in me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ca kho paṭicca, no appaṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s dependent, not independent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ paṭicca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on what? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imameva kāyaṃ paṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on my own body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho pana kāyo anicco saṅkhato paṭiccasamuppanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But this body is impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccaṃ kho pana saṅkhataṃ paṭiccasamuppannaṃ kāyaṃ paṭicca uppannā sukhā vedanā kuto niccā bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So how could a pleasant feeling be permanent, since it has arisen dependent on a body that is impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāye ca sukhāya ca vedanāya aniccānupassī viharati, vayānupassī viharati, virāgānupassī viharati, nirodhānupassī viharati, paṭinissaggānupassī viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing impermanence, vanishing, dispassion, cessation, and letting go in the body and pleasant feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kāye ca sukhāya ca vedanāya aniccānupassino viharato, vayānupassino viharato, virāgānupassino viharato, nirodhānupassino viharato, paṭinissaggānupassino viharato, yo kāye ca sukhāya ca vedanāya rāgānusayo, so pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so, they give up the underlying tendency for greed for the body and pleasant feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno evaṃ satassa sampajānassa appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato uppajjati dukkhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While a mendicant is meditating like this—mindful, aware, diligent, keen, and resolute—if painful feelings arise, they understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘uppannā kho myāyaṃ dukkhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A painful feeling has arisen in me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ca kho paṭicca, no appaṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s dependent, not independent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ paṭicca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on what? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imameva kāyaṃ paṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on my own body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho pana kāyo anicco saṅkhato paṭiccasamuppanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But this body is impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccaṃ kho pana saṅkhataṃ paṭiccasamuppannaṃ kāyaṃ paṭicca uppannā dukkhā vedanā kuto niccā bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So how could a painful feeling be permanent, since it has arisen dependent on a body that is impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāye ca dukkhāya ca vedanāya aniccānupassī viharati, vayānupassī viharati, virāgānupassī viharati, nirodhānupassī viharati, paṭinissaggānupassī viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing impermanence, vanishing, dispassion, cessation, and letting go in the body and painful feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kāye ca dukkhāya ca vedanāya aniccānupassino viharato … pe … paṭinissaggānupassino viharato, yo kāye ca dukkhāya ca vedanāya paṭighānusayo, so pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so, they give up the underlying tendency for repulsion towards the body and painful feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno evaṃ satassa sampajānassa appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā, so evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">While a mendicant is meditating like this—mindful, aware, diligent, keen, and resolute—if neutral feelings arise, they understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘uppannā kho myāyaṃ adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A neutral feeling has arisen in me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ca kho paṭicca, no appaṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s dependent, not independent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ paṭicca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on what? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imameva kāyaṃ paṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on my own body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho pana kāyo anicco saṅkhato paṭiccasamuppanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But this body is impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccaṃ kho pana saṅkhataṃ paṭiccasamuppannaṃ kāyaṃ paṭicca uppannā adukkhamasukhā vedanā kuto niccā bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So how could a neutral feeling be permanent, since it has arisen dependent on a body that is impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāye ca adukkhamasukhāya ca vedanāya aniccānupassī viharati, vayānupassī viharati, virāgānupassī viharati, nirodhānupassī viharati, paṭinissaggānupassī viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing impermanence, vanishing, dispassion, cessation, and letting go in the body and neutral feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kāye ca adukkhamasukhāya ca vedanāya aniccānupassino viharato … pe … paṭinissaggānupassino viharato, yo kāye ca adukkhamasukhāya ca vedanāya avijjānusayo, so pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so, they give up the underlying tendency for ignorance towards the body and neutral feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, sā aniccāti pajānāti, anajjhositāti pajānāti, anabhinanditāti pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhañce vedanaṃ vedayati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a painful feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adukkhamasukhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, sā aniccāti pajānāti, anajjhositāti pajānāti, anabhinanditāti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a neutral feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, visaññutto naṃ vedayati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, visaññutto naṃ vedayati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a painful feeling, they feel it detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adukkhamasukhañce vedanaṃ vedayati, visaññutto naṃ vedayati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body approaching.’ Feeling the end of life approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life approaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kāyassa bhedā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, telañca paṭicca vaṭṭiñca paṭicca telappadīpo jhāyeyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasseva telassa ca vaṭṭiyā ca pariyādānā anāhāro nibbāyeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the oil and the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to lack of fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. Jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, feeling the end of the body approaching, a mendicant understands: ‘I feel the end of the body approaching.’ Feeling the end of life approaching, a mendicant understands: ‘I feel the end of life approaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kāyassa bhedā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
