<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.08-8. Dutiyagelaññasutta  - 8. The Infirmary (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.08. 8. Dutiyagelaññasutta  - 8. The Infirmary (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sagāthāvagga  - 1. With Verses </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena gilānasālā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the infirmary, where he sat down on the seat spread out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sato, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sampajāno kālaṃ āgameyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant should await their time mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vo amhākaṃ anusāsanī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is my instruction to you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant mindful? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu vedanānupassī viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte cittānupassī viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of the mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is mindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sampajāno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant aware? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu abhikkante paṭikkante sampajānakārī hoti … pe … bhāsite tuṇhībhāve sampajānakārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sampajāno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sato, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sampajāno kālaṃ āgameyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant should await their time mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vo amhākaṃ anusāsanī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is my instruction to you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno evaṃ satassa sampajānassa appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato uppajjati sukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While a mendicant is meditating like this—mindful, aware, diligent, keen, and resolute—if pleasant feelings arise, they understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘uppannā kho myāyaṃ sukhā vedanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A pleasant feeling has arisen in me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā ca kho paṭicca, no appaṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s dependent, not independent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ paṭicca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on what? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imameva phassaṃ paṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on this very contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho pana phasso anicco saṅkhato paṭiccasamuppanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But this contact is impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccaṃ kho pana saṅkhataṃ paṭiccasamuppannaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā sukhā vedanā kuto niccā bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So how could a pleasant feeling be permanent, since it has arisen dependent on contact that is impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So phasse ca sukhāya ca vedanāya aniccānupassī viharati, vayānupassī viharati, virāgānupassī viharati, nirodhānupassī viharati, paṭinissaggānupassī viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing impermanence, vanishing, dispassion, cessation, and letting go in contact and pleasant feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa phasse ca sukhāya ca vedanāya aniccānupassino viharato, vayānupassino viharato, virāgānupassino viharato, nirodhānupassino viharato, paṭinissaggānupassino viharato yo phasse ca sukhāya ca vedanāya rāgānusayo, so pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so, they give up the underlying tendency for greed for contact and pleasant feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno evaṃ satassa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">While a mendicant is meditating like this—mindful, aware, diligent, keen, and resolute—if painful feelings arise … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viharato uppajjati dukkhā vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">if neutral feelings arise, they understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘uppannā kho myāyaṃ adukkhamasukhā vedanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A neutral feeling has arisen in me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā ca kho paṭicca, no appaṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s dependent, not independent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ paṭicca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on what? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imameva phassaṃ paṭicca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dependent on this very contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Yathā purimasutte, tathā vitthāretabbo.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(Expand in detail as in the previous discourse.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyassa bhedā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, telañca paṭicca vaṭṭiñca paṭicca telappadīpo jhāyeyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasseva telassa ca vaṭṭiyā ca pariyādānā anāhāro nibbāyeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the oil and the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to lack of fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. Jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, feeling the end of the body approaching, a mendicant understands: ‘I feel the end of the body approaching.’ Feeling the end of life approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life approaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kāyassa bhedā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
