<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.16-16. Dutiyaānandasutta  - 16. With Ānanda (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.16. 16. Dutiyaānandasutta  - 16. With Ānanda (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rahogatavagga  - 2. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katamā nu kho, ānanda, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, what is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṃnettikā bhagavaṃpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu, bhante, bhagavantaññeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, ānanda, suṇohi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Ānanda, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tisso imā, ānanda, vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, there are these three feelings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">pleasant, painful, and neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, ānanda, vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called feeling. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassasamudayā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo paṭippassaddho hoti, doso paṭippassaddho hoti, moho paṭippassaddho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have been tranquilized.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
