<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.15-15. Paṭhamaānandasutta  - 15. With Ānanda (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.15. 15. Paṭhamaānandasutta  - 15. With Ānanda (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rahogatavagga  - 2. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi, ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha … sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katamā nu kho, bhante, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, ānanda, vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, there are these three feelings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">pleasant, painful, and neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, ānanda, vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling originates from contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassanirodhā vedanānirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact ceases, feeling ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ vedanaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ, ayaṃ vedanāya assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ vedanā aniccā dukkhā vipariṇāmadhammā, ayaṃ vedanāya ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That feeling is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo vedanāya chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ, idaṃ vedanāya nissaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for feeling: this is its escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho panānanda, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṃ nirodho akkhāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I have also explained the progressive cessation of conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vācā niruddhā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has ceased. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca niruddhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo niruddho hoti, doso niruddho hoti, moho niruddho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho panānanda, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṃ vūpasamo akkhāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I have also explained the progressive stilling of conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vācā vūpasantā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has stilled. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca vūpasantā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have stilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo vūpasanto hoti, doso vūpasanto hoti, moho vūpasanto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have stilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho panānanda, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṃ paṭippassaddhi akkhātā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I have also explained the progressive tranquilizing of conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vācā paṭippassaddhā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has been tranquilized. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samāpannassa rūpasaññā paṭippassaddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samāpannassa ākāsānañcāyatanasaññā paṭippassaddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the perception of the dimension of infinite space has been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samāpannassa viññāṇañcāyatanasaññā paṭippassaddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samāpannassa ākiñcaññāyatanasaññā paṭippassaddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca paṭippassaddhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo paṭippassaddho hoti, doso paṭippassaddho hoti, moho paṭippassaddho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have been tranquilized.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
