<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.23-23. Aññatarabhikkhusutta  - 23. With a Mendicant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.23. 23. Aññatarabhikkhusutta  - 23. With a Mendicant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Aṭṭhasatapariyāyavagga  - 3. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katamā nu kho, bhante, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the origin of feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhu, vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, there are these three feelings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">pleasant, painful, and neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā vuccanti, bhikkhu, vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling originates from contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is the practice that leads to the origin of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassanirodhā vedanānirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact ceases, feeling ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ vedanaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ, ayaṃ vedanāya assādo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ vedanā aniccā dukkhā vipariṇāmadhammā, ayaṃ vedanāya ādīnavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That feeling is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo vedanāya chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ, idaṃ vedanāya nissaraṇan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for feeling: this is its escape.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
