<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.04-4. Pātālasutta  - 4. The Abyss </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.04. 4. Pātālasutta  - 4. The Abyss </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sagāthāvagga  - 1. With Verses </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Assutavā, bhikkhave, puthujjano yaṃ vācaṃ bhāsati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when an uneducated ordinary person says that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi mahāsamudde pātālo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">there’s a hellish abyss under the ocean, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho panetaṃ, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano asantaṃ avijjamānaṃ evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re speaking of something that doesn’t exist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi mahāsamudde pātālo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sārīrikānaṃ kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, dukkhānaṃ vedanānaṃ adhivacanaṃ yadidaṃ ‘pātālo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Hellish abyss’ is a term for painful physical feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assutavā, bhikkhave, puthujjano sārīrikāya dukkhāya vedanāya phuṭṭho samāno socati kilamati paridevati urattāḷiṃ kandati sammohaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an uneducated ordinary person experiences painful physical feelings they sorrow and pine and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ‘assutavā puthujjano pātāle na paccuṭṭhāsi, gādhañca nājjhagā’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re called an uneducated ordinary person who hasn’t stood up in the hellish abyss and has gained no footing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutavā ca kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako sārīrikāya dukkhāya vedanāya phuṭṭho samāno neva socati, na kilamati, na paridevati, na urattāḷiṃ kandati, na sammohaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an educated noble disciple experiences painful physical feelings they don’t sorrow or pine or lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ‘sutavā ariyasāvako pātāle paccuṭṭhāsi, gādhañca ajjhagā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re called an educated noble disciple who has stood up in the hellish abyss and gained a footing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo etā nādhivāseti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you can’t abide </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannā vedanā dukhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those painful physical feelings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sārīrikā pāṇaharā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that arise and sap your vitality; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāhi phuṭṭho pavedhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you tremble at their touch, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkandati parodati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">weeping and wailing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbalo appathāmako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a weakling lacking strength—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na so pātāle paccuṭṭhāsi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you won’t stand up in the hellish abyss </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho gādhampi nājjhagā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and gain a footing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo cetā adhivāseti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you can abide </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannā vedanā dukhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those painful physical feelings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sārīrikā pāṇaharā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that arise and sap your vitality; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāhi phuṭṭho na vedhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you don’t tremble at their touch—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve pātāle paccuṭṭhāsi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you stand up in the hellish abyss </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho gādhampi ajjhagā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and gain a footing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
