<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.03-3. Pahānasutta  - 3. Giving Up </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.03. 3. Pahānasutta  - 3. Giving Up </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sagāthāvagga  - 1. With Verses </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhāya, bhikkhave, vedanāya rāgānusayo pahātabbo, dukkhāya vedanāya paṭighānusayo pahātabbo, adukkhamasukhāya vedanāya avijjānusayo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The underlying tendency to greed should be given up when it comes to pleasant feeling. The underlying tendency to repulsion should be given up when it comes to painful feeling. The underlying tendency to ignorance should be given up when it comes to neutral feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno sukhāya vedanāya rāgānusayo pahīno hoti, dukkhāya vedanāya paṭighānusayo pahīno hoti, adukkhamasukhāya vedanāya avijjānusayo pahīno hoti, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ‘bhikkhu niranusayo sammaddaso acchecchi taṇhaṃ, vivattayi saṃyojanaṃ, sammā mānābhisamayā antamakāsi dukkhassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has given up these underlying tendencies, they’re called a mendicant without underlying tendencies, who sees rightly, has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhaṃ vedayamānassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you feel pleasure </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ appajānato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">without understanding feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So rāgānusayo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the underlying tendency to greed is there, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anissaraṇadassino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you don’t see the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ vedayamānassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you feel pain </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ appajānato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">without understanding feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭighānusayo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the underlying tendency to repulsion is there, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anissaraṇadassino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you don’t see the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adukkhamasukhaṃ santaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As for that peaceful, neutral feeling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhūripaññena desitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he of vast wisdom has taught </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañcāpi abhinandati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that if you relish it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">neva dukkhā pamuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re still not released from suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca bhikkhu ātāpī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when a mendicant is keen, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sampajaññaṃ na riñcati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not neglecting situational awareness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato so vedanā sabbā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that astute person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parijānāti paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">understands all feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vedanā pariññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Completely understanding feelings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe dhamme anāsavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re without defilements in this very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyassa bhedā dhammaṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That knowledge-master is grounded in the teaching; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhyaṃ nopeti vedagū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when their body breaks up, they can’t be reckoned.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
