<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.22-22. Aṭṭhasatasutta  - 22. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.22. 22. Aṭṭhasatasutta  - 22. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Aṭṭhasatapariyāyavagga  - 3. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhasatapariyāyaṃ vo, bhikkhave, dhammapariyāyaṃ desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching on the hundred and eight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, aṭṭhasatapariyāyo, dhammapariyāyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the exposition of the teaching on the hundred and eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvepi mayā, bhikkhave, vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, in one explanation I’ve spoken of two feelings. In another explanation I’ve spoken of three feelings, or five, six, eighteen, thirty-six, or a hundred and eight feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tissopi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcapi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chapi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhārasāpi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chattiṃsāpi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhasatampi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, dve vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the two feelings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyikā ca cetasikā ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Physical and mental. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, dve vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the two feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, tisso vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the three feelings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, tisso vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, pañca vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the five feelings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhindriyaṃ, dukkhindriyaṃ, somanassindriyaṃ, domanassindriyaṃ, upekkhindriyaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, pañca vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, cha vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the six feelings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhusamphassajā vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling born of eye contact … ear contact … nose contact … tongue contact … body contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manosamphassajā vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">mind contact. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, cha vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, aṭṭhārasa vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the eighteen feelings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha somanassūpavicārā, cha domanassūpavicārā, cha upekkhūpavicārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are six preoccupations with happiness, six preoccupations with sadness, and six preoccupations with equanimity. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, aṭṭhārasa vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, chattiṃsa vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the thirty-six feelings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha gehasitāni somanassāni, cha nekkhammasitāni somanassāni, cha gehasitāni domanassāni, cha nekkhammasitāni domanassāni, cha gehasitā upekkhā, cha nekkhammasitā upekkhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Six kinds of lay happiness and six kinds of renunciate happiness. Six kinds of lay sadness and six kinds of renunciate sadness. Six kinds of lay equanimity and six kinds of renunciate equanimity. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, chattiṃsa vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, aṭṭhasataṃ vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the hundred and eight feelings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atītā chattiṃsa vedanā, anāgatā chattiṃsa vedanā, paccuppannā chattiṃsa vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thirty six feelings in the past, future, and present. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, aṭṭhasataṃ vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the hundred and eight feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, aṭṭhasatapariyāyo dhammapariyāyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the exposition of the teaching on the hundred and eight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
