<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>37.02-2. Purisasutta  - 2. A Man </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">37.02. 2. Purisasutta  - 2. A Man </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamapeyyālavagga  - 1. Abbreviated Texts </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato puriso ekantaamanāpo hoti mātugāmassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a man has five factors he is extremely undesirable to a female. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca rūpavā hoti, na ca bhogavā hoti, na ca sīlavā hoti, alaso ca hoti, pajañcassa na labhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s not attractive, wealthy, or ethical; he’s idle, and he doesn’t beget children. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi aṅgehi samannāgato puriso ekantaamanāpo hoti mātugāmassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a man has these five factors he is extremely undesirable to a female. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato puriso ekantamanāpo hoti mātugāmassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a man has five factors he is extremely desirable to a female. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpavā ca hoti, bhogavā ca hoti, sīlavā ca hoti, dakkho ca hoti analaso, pajañcassa labhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s attractive, wealthy, and ethical; he’s skillful and tireless, and he begets children. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi aṅgehi samannāgato puriso ekantamanāpo hoti mātugāmassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a man has these five factors he is extremely desirable to a female.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
