<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>37.03-3. Āveṇikadukkhasutta  - 3. Particular Suffering </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">37.03. 3. Āveṇikadukkhasutta  - 3. Particular Suffering </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamapeyyālavagga  - 1. Abbreviated Texts </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa āveṇikāni dukkhāni, yāni mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five kinds of suffering that particularly apply to females. They’re undergone by females and not by men. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo daharova samāno patikulaṃ gacchati, ñātakehi vinā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a female, while still young, goes to live with her husband’s family and is separated from her relatives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa paṭhamaṃ āveṇikaṃ dukkhaṃ, yaṃ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first kind of suffering that particularly applies to females. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, mātugāmo utunī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a female undergoes the menstrual cycle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa dutiyaṃ āveṇikaṃ dukkhaṃ, yaṃ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second kind of suffering that particularly applies to females. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, mātugāmo gabbhinī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a female undergoes pregnancy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa tatiyaṃ āveṇikaṃ dukkhaṃ, yaṃ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third kind of suffering that particularly applies to females. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, mātugāmo vijāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a female gives birth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa catutthaṃ āveṇikaṃ dukkhaṃ, yaṃ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth kind of suffering that particularly applies to females. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, mātugāmo purisassa pāricariyaṃ upeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a female provides services for a man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa pañcamaṃ āveṇikaṃ dukkhaṃ, yaṃ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth kind of suffering that particularly applies to females. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca mātugāmassa āveṇikāni dukkhāni, yāni mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five kinds of suffering that particularly apply to females. They’re undergone by females and not by men.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
