<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>37.01-1. Mātugāmasutta  - 1. A Female </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">37.01. 1. Mātugāmasutta  - 1. A Female </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamapeyyālavagga  - 1. Abbreviated Texts </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato mātugāmo ekantaamanāpo hoti purisassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a female has five factors she is extremely undesirable to a man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca rūpavā hoti, na ca bhogavā hoti, na ca sīlavā hoti, alaso ca hoti, pajañcassa na labhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s not attractive, wealthy, or ethical; she’s idle, and she doesn’t beget children. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi aṅgehi samannāgato mātugāmo ekantaamanāpo hoti purisassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a female has these five factors she is extremely undesirable to a man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato mātugāmo ekantamanāpo hoti purisassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a female has five factors she is extremely desirable to a man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpavā ca hoti, bhogavā ca hoti, sīlavā ca hoti, dakkho ca hoti analaso, pajañcassa labhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s attractive, wealthy, and ethical; she’s skillful and tireless, and she begets children. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi aṅgehi samannāgato mātugāmo ekantamanāpo hoti purisassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a female has these five factors she is extremely desirable to a man.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
