<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>37.32-32. Ṭhānasutta  - 32. Things </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">37.32. 32. Ṭhānasutta  - 32. Things </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Balavagga  - 3. Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, ṭhānāni dullabhāni akatapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are five things that are hard to get for females who have not made merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyeyyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I be born into a suitable family!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamaṃ ṭhānaṃ dullabhaṃ akatapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyitvā patirūpaṃ kulaṃ gaccheyyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having been born in a suitable family, may I marry into a suitable family!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyaṃ ṭhānaṃ dullabhaṃ akatapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyitvā, patirūpaṃ kulaṃ gantvā, asapatti agāraṃ ajjhāvaseyyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having been born in a suitable family and married into a suitable family, may I live at home without a co-wife!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyaṃ ṭhānaṃ dullabhaṃ akatapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyitvā, patirūpaṃ kulaṃ gantvā, asapatti agāraṃ ajjhāvasantī puttavatī assanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having been born in a suitable family, and married into a suitable family, and living at home without a co-wife, may I have children!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, catutthaṃ ṭhānaṃ dullabhaṃ akatapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyitvā, patirūpaṃ kulaṃ gantvā, asapatti agāraṃ ajjhāvasantī puttavatī samānā sāmikaṃ abhibhuyya vatteyyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having been born in a suitable family, and married into a suitable family, and living at home without a co-wife, and having had children, may I master my husband!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamaṃ ṭhānaṃ dullabhaṃ akatapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca ṭhānāni dullabhāni akatapuññena mātugāmenāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five things that are hard to get for females who have not made merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, ṭhānāni sulabhāni katapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are five things that are easy to get for females who have made merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyeyyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May I be born into a suitable family!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamaṃ ṭhānaṃ sulabhaṃ katapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyitvā patirūpaṃ kulaṃ gaccheyyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having been born into a suitable family, may I marry into a suitable family!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyaṃ ṭhānaṃ sulabhaṃ katapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyitvā patirūpaṃ kulaṃ gantvā asapatti agāraṃ ajjhāvaseyyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having been born into a suitable family and married into a suitable family, may I live at home without a co-wife!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyaṃ ṭhānaṃ sulabhaṃ katapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyitvā patirūpaṃ kulaṃ gantvā asapatti agāraṃ ajjhāvasantī puttavatī assanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having been born into a suitable family, and married into a suitable family, and living at home without a co-wife, may I have children!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, catutthaṃ ṭhānaṃ sulabhaṃ katapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patirūpe kule jāyitvā patirūpaṃ kulaṃ gantvā asapatti agāraṃ ajjhāvasantī puttavatī samānā sāmikaṃ abhibhuyya vatteyyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having been born into a suitable family, and married into a suitable family, and living at home without a co-wife, and having had children, may I master my husband!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamaṃ ṭhānaṃ sulabhaṃ katapuññena mātugāmena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca ṭhānāni sulabhāni katapuññena mātugāmenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five things that are easy to get for females who have made merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
