<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>38.03-3. Dhammavādīpañhāsutta  - 3. Principled Speech </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">38.03. 3. Dhammavādīpañhāsutta  - 3. Principled Speech </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Jambukhādakavagga  - 1. With Jambukhādaka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ke nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, loke dhammavādino, ke loke suppaṭipannā, ke loke sugatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, who in the world have principled speech? Who in the world practice well? Who are the Holy Ones in the world?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye kho, āvuso, rāgappahānāya dhammaṃ desenti, dosappahānāya dhammaṃ desenti, mohappahānāya dhammaṃ desenti, te loke dhammavādino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, those who teach principles for giving up greed, hate, and delusion have principled speech in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kho, āvuso, rāgassa pahānāya paṭipannā, dosassa pahānāya paṭipannā, mohassa pahānāya paṭipannā, te loke suppaṭipannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who practice for giving up greed, hate, and delusion are practicing well in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kho, āvuso, rāgo pahīno ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo, doso pahīno ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo, moho pahīno ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo, te loke sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have given up greed, hate, and delusion—so they’re cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future—are Holy Ones in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi panāvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But, reverend, is there a path and a practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi kho, āvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo panāvuso, maggo katamā paṭipadā etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, what is it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayameva kho, āvuso, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāya, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the path, this is the practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhaddako, āvuso, maggo bhaddikā paṭipadā, etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is a fine path, a fine practice, for giving up greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alañca panāvuso sāriputta, appamādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just this much is enough to be diligent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
