<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>39.01-15-1. Sāmaṇḍakasutta  - 1. With Sāmaṇḍaka on Extinguishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">39.01-15. 1. Sāmaṇḍakasutta  - 1. With Sāmaṇḍaka on Extinguishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sāmaṇḍakavagga  - 1. With Sāmaṇḍaka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā sāriputto vajjīsu viharati ukkacelāyaṃ gaṅgāya nadiyā tīre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying in the land of the Vajjis near Ukkacelā on the bank of the Ganges river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāmaṇḍako paribbājako yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Sāmaṇḍaka went up to Venerable Sāriputta and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho sāmaṇḍako paribbājako āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Nibbānaṃ, nibbānan’ti, āvuso sāriputta, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, they speak of this thing called ‘extinguishment’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho, āvuso, nibbānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is extinguishment?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, āvuso, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, the ending of greed, hate, and delusion </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati nibbānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi panāvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā, etassa nibbānassa sacchikiriyāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But, reverend, is there a path and a practice for realizing this extinguishment?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi kho, āvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā, etassa nibbānassa sacchikiriyāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo panāvuso, maggo katamā paṭipadā etassa nibbānassa sacchikiriyāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, what is it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayameva kho, āvuso, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, etassa nibbānassa sacchikiriyāya, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā, etassa nibbānassa sacchikiriyāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the path, the practice, for realizing this extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhaddako, āvuso, maggo bhaddikā paṭipadā, etassa nibbānassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, this is a fine path, a fine practice, for realizing this extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alañca panāvuso sāriputta, appamādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just this much is enough to be diligent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Yathā jambukhādakasaṃyuttaṃ, tathā vitthāretabbaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(These should be expanded in the same way as the Linked Discourses with Jambukhādaka.)</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
