<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>40.09-9. Animittapañhāsutta  - 9. A Question About the Signless </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">40.09. 9. Animittapañhāsutta  - 9. A Question About the Signless </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Moggallānavagga  - 1. By Moggallāna </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Animitto cetosamādhi, animitto cetosamādhī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They speak of this thing called the ‘signless immersion of the heart’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo nu kho animitto cetosamādhīti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the signless immersion of the heart? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idha bhikkhu sabbanimittānaṃ amanasikārā animittaṃ cetosamādhiṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s when a mendicant, not focusing on any signs, enters and remains in the signless immersion of the heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati animitto cetosamādhī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the signless immersion of the heart.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, sabbanimittānaṃ amanasikārā animittaṃ cetosamādhiṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so … I was entering and remaining in the signless immersion of the heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, iminā vihārena viharato nimittānusāri viññāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While I was in that meditation, my consciousness followed after signs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho maṃ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘moggallāna, moggallāna. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā, brāhmaṇa, animittaṃ cetosamādhiṃ pamādo, animitte cetosamādhismiṃ cittaṃ saṇṭhapehi, animitte cetosamādhismiṃ cittaṃ ekodiṃ karohi, animitte cetosamādhismiṃ cittaṃ samādahā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t neglect the signless immersion of the heart, brahmin! Settle your mind in the signless immersion of the heart; unify your mind and immerse it in the signless immersion of the heart.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, aparena samayena sabbanimittānaṃ amanasikārā animittaṃ cetosamādhiṃ upasampajja vihāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, after some time … I entered and remained in the signless immersion of the heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi taṃ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So if anyone should be rightly called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘satthārānuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṃ patto’ti, mamaṃ taṃ sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">a disciple who attained to great direct knowledge with help from the Teacher, it’s me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘satthārānuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṃ patto’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
