<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>41.07-7. Godattasutta  - 7. With Godatta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">41.07. 7. Godattasutta  - 7. With Godatta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cittavagga  - 1. With Citta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā godatto macchikāsaṇḍe viharati ambāṭakavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Godatta was staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yenāyasmā godatto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ godattaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho cittaṃ gahapatiṃ āyasmā godatto etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta the householder went up to Venerable Godatta, bowed, and sat down to one side. Godatta said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yā cāyaṃ, gahapati, appamāṇā cetovimutti, yā ca ākiñcaññā cetovimutti, yā ca suññatā cetovimutti, yā ca animittā cetovimutti, ime dhammā nānatthā nānābyañjanā udāhu ekatthā byañjanameva nānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, the limitless heart’s release, and the heart’s release through nothingness, and the heart’s release through emptiness, and the signless heart’s release: do these things differ in both meaning and phrasing? Or do they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, bhante, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma ime dhammā nānatthā ceva nānābyañjanā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, there is a way in which these things differ in both meaning and phrasing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi pana, bhante, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma ime dhammā ekatthā byañjanameva nānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there’s also a way in which they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhante, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma ime dhammā nānatthā ceva nānābyañjanā ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the way in which these things differ in both meaning and phrasing? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhante, bhikkhu mettāsahagatena cetasā ekaṃ disaṃ pharitvā viharati, tathā dutiyaṃ, tathā tatiyaṃ, tathā catutthaṃ. Iti uddhamadho tiriyaṃ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena pharitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karuṇāsahagatena cetasā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muditāsahagatena cetasā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsahagatena cetasā ekaṃ disaṃ pharitvā viharati, tathā dutiyaṃ, tathā tatiyaṃ, tathā catutthaṃ. Iti uddhamadho tiriyaṃ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ upekkhāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena pharitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhante, appamāṇā cetovimutti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the limitless heart’s release. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhante, ākiñcaññā cetovimutti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the heart’s release through nothingness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhante, bhikkhu sabbaso viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma, ‘natthi kiñcī’ti ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhante, ākiñcaññā cetovimutti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the heart’s release through nothingness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhante, suññatā cetovimutti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the heart’s release through emptiness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhante, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘suññamidaṃ attena vā attaniyena vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is empty of a self or what belongs to a self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhante, suññatā cetovimutti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the heart’s release through emptiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhante, animittā cetovimutti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the signless heart’s release? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhante, bhikkhu sabbanimittānaṃ amanasikārā animittaṃ cetosamādhiṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, not focusing on any signs, enters and remains in the signless immersion of the heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhante, animittā cetovimutti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the signless heart’s release. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhante, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma ime dhammā nānatthā ceva nānābyañjanā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the way in which these things differ in both meaning and phrasing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhante, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma ime dhammā ekatthā byañjanameva nānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the way in which they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgo, bhante, pamāṇakaraṇo, doso pamāṇakaraṇo, moho pamāṇakaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed, hate, and delusion are makers of limits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā kho, bhante, appamāṇā cetovimuttiyo, akuppā tāsaṃ cetovimutti aggamakkhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The unshakable heart’s release is said to be the best kind of limitless heart’s release. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho pana akuppā cetovimutti suññā rāgena, suññā dosena, suññā mohena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That unshakable heart’s release is empty of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgo kho, bhante, kiñcanaṃ, doso kiñcanaṃ, moho kiñcanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed is something, hate is something, and delusion is something. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā kho, bhante, ākiñcaññā cetovimuttiyo, akuppā tāsaṃ cetovimutti aggamakkhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The unshakable heart’s release is said to be the best kind of heart’s release through nothingness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho pana akuppā cetovimutti suññā rāgena, suññā dosena, suññā mohena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That unshakable heart’s release is empty of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgo kho, bhante, nimittakaraṇo, doso nimittakaraṇo, moho nimittakaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed, hate, and delusion are makers of signs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā kho, bhante, animittā cetovimuttiyo, akuppā tāsaṃ cetovimutti aggamakkhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The unshakable heart’s release is said to be the best kind of signless heart’s release. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho pana akuppā cetovimutti suññā rāgena, suññā dosena, suññā mohena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That unshakable heart’s release is empty of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhante, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma ime dhammā ekatthā byañjanameva nānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the way in which they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lābhā te, gahapati, suladdhaṃ te, gahapati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re fortunate, householder, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa te gambhīre buddhavacane paññācakkhu kamatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to traverse the Buddha’s deep teachings with the eye of wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
