<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>42.01-1. Caṇḍasutta  - 1. Vicious </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">42.01. 1. Caṇḍasutta  - 1. Vicious </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Gāmaṇivagga  - 1. Chiefs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho caṇḍo gāmaṇi yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho caṇḍo gāmaṇi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the chief named Fury went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena midhekacco caṇḍo caṇḍotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some people are regarded as furious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena midhekacco sorato soratotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">while others are regarded as sweet-natured?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, gāmaṇi, ekaccassa rāgo appahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Take someone who hasn’t given up greed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgassa appahīnattā pare kopenti, parehi kopiyamāno kopaṃ pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they get annoyed by others, and they show it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So caṇḍotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re regarded as furious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Doso appahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They haven’t given up hate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dosassa appahīnattā pare kopenti, parehi kopiyamāno kopaṃ pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they get annoyed by others, and they show it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So caṇḍotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re regarded as furious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Moho appahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They haven’t given up delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mohassa appahīnattā pare kopenti, parehi kopiyamāno kopaṃ pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they get annoyed by others, and they show it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So caṇḍotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re regarded as furious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, gāmaṇi, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo yena midhekacco caṇḍo caṇḍotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why some people are regarded as furious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, gāmaṇi, ekaccassa rāgo pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But take someone who has given up greed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgassa pahīnattā pare na kopenti, parehi kopiyamāno kopaṃ na pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they don’t get annoyed by others, and don’t show it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So soratotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re regarded as sweet-natured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Doso pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve given up hate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dosassa pahīnattā pare na kopenti, parehi kopiyamāno kopaṃ na pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they don’t get annoyed by others, and don’t show it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So soratotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re regarded as sweet-natured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Moho pahīno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve given up delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mohassa pahīnattā pare na kopenti, parehi kopiyamāno kopaṃ na pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they don’t get annoyed by others, and don’t show it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So soratotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re regarded as sweet-natured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, gāmaṇi, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena midhekacco sorato soratotveva saṅkhaṃ gacchatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why some people are regarded as sweet-natured.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, caṇḍo gāmaṇi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the chief named Fury said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bhante, abhikkantaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, sir! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhagavatā anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakaṃ maṃ bhagavā dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
