<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>43.01-1. Kāyagatāsatisutta  - 1. Mindfulness of the Body </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">43.01. 1. Kāyagatāsatisutta  - 1. Mindfulness of the Body </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Asaṅkhatañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi asaṅkhatagāmiñca maggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the unconditioned and the path that leads to the unconditioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, asaṅkhataṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the unconditioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, bhikkhave, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, asaṅkhataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the unconditioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, asaṅkhatagāmimaggo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyagatāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfulness of the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, asaṅkhatagāmimaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the path that leads to the unconditioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, desitaṃ vo mayā asaṅkhataṃ, desito asaṅkhatagāmimaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, mendicants, I’ve taught you the unconditioned and the path that leads to the unconditioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, satthārā karaṇīyaṃ sāvakānaṃ hitesinā anukampakena anukampaṃ upādāya, kataṃ vo taṃ mayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Out of compassion, I’ve done what a teacher should do who wants what’s best for their disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etāni, bhikkhave, rukkhamūlāni, etāni suññāgārāni. Jhāyatha, bhikkhave, mā pamādattha; mā pacchā vippaṭisārino ahuvattha. Ayaṃ vo amhākaṃ anusāsanī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here are these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don’t be negligent! Don’t regret it later! This is my instruction to you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
