<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>44.10-10. Ānandasutta  - 10. With Ānanda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">44.10. 10. Ānandasutta  - 10. With Ānanda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Abyākatavagga  - 1. The Undeclared Points </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vacchagotto paribbājako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho vacchagotto paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu kho, bho gotama, atthattā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, does the self exist absolutely?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhagavā tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when he said this, the Buddha kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana, bho gotama, natthattā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then does the self not exist absolutely?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But for a second time the Buddha kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vacchagotto paribbājako uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Vacchagotta got up from his seat and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando acirapakkante vacchagotte paribbājake bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then, not long after Vacchagotta had left, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu kho, bhante, bhagavā vacchagottassa paribbājakassa pañhaṃ puṭṭho na byākāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, why didn’t you answer Vacchagotta’s question?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahañcānanda, vacchagottassa paribbājakassa ‘atthattā’ti puṭṭho samāno ‘atthattā’ti byākareyyaṃ, ye te, ānanda, samaṇabrāhmaṇā sassatavādā tesametaṃ saddhiṃ abhavissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, when Vacchagotta asked me whether the self exists absolutely, if I had answered that ‘the self exists absolutely’ I would have been siding with the ascetics and brahmins who are eternalists. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañcānanda, vacchagottassa paribbājakassa ‘natthattā’ti puṭṭho samāno ‘natthattā’ti byākareyyaṃ, ye te, ānanda, samaṇabrāhmaṇā ucchedavādā tesametaṃ saddhiṃ abhavissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When Vacchagotta asked me whether the self does not exist absolutely, if I had answered that ‘the self does not exist absolutely’ I would have been siding with the ascetics and brahmins who are annihilationists. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañcānanda, vacchagottassa paribbājakassa ‘atthattā’ti puṭṭho samāno ‘atthattā’ti byākareyyaṃ, api nu me taṃ, ānanda, anulomaṃ abhavissa ñāṇassa uppādāya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When Vacchagotta asked me whether the self exists absolutely, if I had answered that ‘the self exists absolutely’ would that have helped give rise to the knowledge that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sabbe dhammā anattā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">all things are not-self?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahañcānanda, vacchagottassa paribbājakassa ‘natthattā’ti puṭṭho samāno ‘natthattā’ti byākareyyaṃ, sammūḷhassa, ānanda, vacchagottassa paribbājakassa bhiyyo sammohāya abhavissa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When Vacchagotta asked me whether the self does not exist absolutely, if I had answered that ‘the self does not exist absolutely’, Vacchagotta—who is already confused—would have got even more confused, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahuvā me nūna pubbe attā, so etarahi natthī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It seems that the self that I once had no longer exists.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
