<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc86_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on precious things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">86. Sūcigharasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">86. The training rule on needle cases </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṁ nigrodhārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the Sakyan country in the Banyan Tree Monastery at Kapilavatthu. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarena dantakārena bhikkhū pavāritā honti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time an ivory-worker had invited the monks </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yesaṁ ayyānaṁ sūcigharena attho ahaṁ sūcigharenā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who needed needle cases to ask for one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū bahū sūcighare viññāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the monks asked for many needle cases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṁ khuddakā sūcigharā te mahante sūcighare viññāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who had small needle cases asked for large ones, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṁ mahantā sūcigharā te khuddake sūcighare viññāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and those who had large needle cases asked for small ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so dantakāro bhikkhūnaṁ bahū sūcighare karonto na sakkoti aññaṁ vikkāyikaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ kātuṁ, attanāpi na yāpeti, puttadāropissa kilamati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ivory-worker was so busy making needle cases for the monks that he was unable to make goods for sale. He could not make a living for himself, and his wives and children suffered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū sūcighare viññāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics not have any sense of moderation and ask for many needle cases? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ imesaṁ bahū sūcighare karonto na sakkoti aññaṁ vikkāyikaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ kātuṁ, attanāpi na yāpeti, puttadāropissa kilamatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This ivory-worker is so busy making needle cases for them that he’s unable to make goods for sale. He can’t make a living for himself, and his wives and children are suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū sūcighare viññāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those monks not have a sense of moderation and ask for many needle cases?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū sūcighare viññāpentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that there are monks who do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā na mattaṁ jānitvā bahū sūcighare viññāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu aṭṭhimayaṁ vā dantamayaṁ vā visāṇamayaṁ vā sūcigharaṁ kārāpeyya bhedanakaṁ, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has a needle case made from bone, ivory, or horn, it is to be destroyed, and he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhi nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bone: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci aṭṭhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any kind of bone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Danto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Ivory: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthidanto vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">elephant tooth is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visāṇaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Horn: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci visāṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any kind of horn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has made: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karoti vā kārāpeti vā, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes one or has one made, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena bhinditvā pācittiyaṁ desetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets it, it is to be destroyed, and he is then to confess an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes himself what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññassatthāya karoti vā kārāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes one or has one made for the benefit of someone else, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gets one that was made by someone else and then uses it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gaṇṭhikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a toggle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">araṇike,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a fire kindler; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vidhe,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a buckle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">añjaniyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is an ointment box; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">añjanisalākāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is an ointment stick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsijaṭe,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a adz handle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">udakapuñchaniyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a water wiper; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sūcigharasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on needle cases, the fourth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
