<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc89_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on precious things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">89. Nisīdanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">89. The training rule on sitting mats </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ nisīdanaṁ anuññātaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he allowed the sitting mat for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā nisīdanaṁ anuññātan”ti appamāṇikāni nisīdanāni dhārenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing this, the monks from the group of six used sitting mats that were inappropriate in size. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañcassapi pīṭhassapi puratopi pacchatopi olambenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sitting mats hung down from beds and benches, both in front and behind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū appamāṇikāni nisīdanāni dhāressantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six use such sitting mats?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, appamāṇikāni nisīdanāni dhārethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, appamāṇikāni nisīdanāni dhāressatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nisīdanaṁ pana bhikkhunā kārayamānena pamāṇikaṁ kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk is having a sitting mat made, it is to be made the right size. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṁ pamāṇaṁ—dīghaso dve vidatthiyo, sugatavidatthiyā; tiriyaṁ diyaḍḍhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the right size: two standard handspans long and one-and-a-half wide. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ atikkāmayato chedanakaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it exceeds that, it is to be cut down, and he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā udāyī mahākāyo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time there was a big monk called Venerable Udāyī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhagavato purato nisīdanaṁ paññapetvā samantato samañchamāno nisīdati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After putting out his sitting mat in front of the Buddha, he stretched it on all sides before sitting down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, udāyi, nisīdanaṁ samantato samañchasi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Udāyī, why are you stretching the sitting mat on all sides, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi purāṇāsikoṭṭho”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">as if an old hide?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathā hi pana, bhante, bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ atikhuddakaṁ nisīdanaṁ anuññātan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because, Venerable Sir, the sitting mat you’ve allowed for the monks is too small.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, nisīdanassa dasaṁ vidatthiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a border of one handspan for the sitting mat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nisīdanaṁ pana bhikkhunā kārayamānena pamāṇikaṁ kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk is having a sitting mat made, it should be made the right size. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṁ pamāṇaṁ—dīghaso dve vidatthiyo, sugatavidatthiyā; tiriyaṁ diyaḍḍhaṁ. Dasā vidatthi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the right size: two standard handspans long and one-and-a-half wide, and a border of one handspan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ atikkāmayato chedanakaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it exceeds that, it is to be cut down, and he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A sitting mat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sadasaṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one with a border is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārayamānenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is having made: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karonto vā kārāpento vā pamāṇikaṁ kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">making it himself or having it made, it should be made the right size. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṁ pamāṇaṁ— dīghaso dve vidatthiyo, sugatavidatthiyā; tiriyaṁ diyaḍḍhaṁ. Dasā vidatthi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the right size: two standard handspans long and one-and-a-half wide, and a border of one handspan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ atikkāmetvā karoti vā kārāpeti vā, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes one, or has one made, that exceeds that, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena chinditvā pācittiyaṁ desetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets it, it is to be cut down, and he is then to confess an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes himself what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññassatthāya karoti vā kārāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes one or has one made for the benefit of someone else, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gets one that was made by someone else and then uses it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pamāṇikaṁ karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes it the right size; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakaṁ karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes it smaller than the right size; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññena kataṁ pamāṇātikkantaṁ paṭilabhitvā chinditvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets one made by another that exceeds the right size and then cuts it down before using it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitānaṁ vā bhūmattharaṇaṁ vā sāṇipākāraṁ vā bhisiṁ vā bibbohanaṁ vā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes a canopy, a floor cover, a cloth screen, a mattress, or a pillow; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on sitting mats, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
