<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc36_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on eating </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">36. Dutiyapavāraṇāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">36. The second training rule on invitations </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena dve bhikkhū kosalesu janapade sāvatthiṁ addhānamaggappaṭipannā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time two monks were traveling through the Kosalan country on their way to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko bhikkhu anācāraṁ ācarati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One monk misbehaved </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyo bhikkhu taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the other said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māvuso, evarūpamakāsi, netaṁ kappatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t do that! It’s not allowable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tasmiṁ upanandhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of that the first monk became resentful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū sāvatthiṁ agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then carried on to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṁ aññatarassa pūgassa saṅghabhattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards an association in Sāvatthī was offering a meal to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyo bhikkhu bhuttāvī pavārito hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the second monk had finished his meal and refused an invitation to eat more, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upanaddho bhikkhu ñātikulaṁ gantvā piṇḍapātaṁ ādāya yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the resentful monk brought back some almsfood from his own family. He then said to the other, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhuñjāhi, āvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please eat!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alaṁ, āvuso, paripuṇṇomhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no need. I’m full.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sundaro, āvuso, piṇḍapāto, bhuñjāhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The almsfood is nice, please eat.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu tena bhikkhunā nippīḷiyamāno taṁ piṇḍapātaṁ bhuñji.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And because he was pressured, he ate the almsfood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upanaddho bhikkhu taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The resentful monk then said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tvampi nāma, āvuso, maṁ vattabbaṁ maññasi yaṁ tvaṁ bhuttāvī pavārito anatirittaṁ bhojanaṁ bhuñjasī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who are you to correct me when you eat food that’s not leftover even though you have finished your meal and refused an invitation to eat more?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu, āvuso, ācikkhitabban”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Shouldn’t you have told me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu, āvuso, pucchitabban”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Shouldn’t you have asked?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second monk told the monks what had happened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized the other, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu bhikkhuṁ bhuttāviṁ pavāritaṁ anatirittena bhojanena abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāressatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a monk invite another monk to eat food that’s not leftover, when the other has finished his meal and refused an invitation to eat more ?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, bhikkhuṁ bhuttāviṁ pavāritaṁ anatirittena bhojanena abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāresī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, bhikkhuṁ bhuttāviṁ pavāritaṁ anatirittena bhojanena abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāressasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana bhikkhave imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuṁ bhuttāviṁ pavāritaṁ anatirittena khādanīyena vā bhojanīyena vā abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāreyya—‘handa, bhikkhu, khāda vā bhuñja vā’ti, jānaṁ āsādanāpekkho, bhuttasmiṁ, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk invites a monk, who he knows has finished his meal and refused an invitation to eat more, to eat fresh or cooked food that is not left over, saying, “Here, monk, eat,” aiming to criticize him, then when the other has eaten, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhuttāvī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has finished his meal: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññataraṁ bhojanaṁ, antamaso kusaggenapi bhuttaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has eaten any of the five cooked foods, even what fits on the tip of a blade of grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavārito nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Refused an invitation to eat more: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asanaṁ paññāyati, bhojanaṁ paññāyati, hatthapāse ṭhito abhiharati, paṭikkhepo paññāyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is eating; there is cooked food; it is offered by one standing within arm’s reach; there is a refusal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anatirittaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not left over: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akappiyakataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">the making it leftover is done with food that is unallowable; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appaṭiggahitakataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done with food that has not been received; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuccāritakataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done with food that is not held in hand; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahatthapāse kataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done by one who is not within arm’s reach; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhuttāvinā kataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done by one who has not finished his meal; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhuttāvinā pavāritena āsanā vuṭṭhitena kataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done by one who has finished his meal, who has refused an invitation to eat more, but who has risen from his seat; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alametaṁ sabban”ti avuttaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t need of any of this,” has not been said; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na gilānātirittaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is not leftover from one who is sick—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etaṁ anatirittaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called “not leftover”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, the post-midday tonics, the seven-day tonics, and the lifetime tonics—the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāreyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Invites to eat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvatakaṁ icchasi tāvatakaṁ gaṇhāhīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">saying, “Take as much as you like.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti, aññe vā tassa ārocenti, so vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the monk has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsādanāpekkhoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Aiming to criticize him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“iminā imaṁ codessāmi sāressāmi paṭicodessāmi paṭisāressāmi maṅkuṁ karissāmī”ti abhiharati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he offers it to him, thinking, “With this I’ll accuse him,” “I’ll remind him,” “I’ll counter-accuse him,” “I’ll counter-remind him,” “I’ll humiliate him,” he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vacanena “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, because of what he says, the other monk receives it with the intention of eating it, then the donor commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, the donor commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanapariyosāne āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the other monk has finished eating, the donor commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavārite pavāritasaññī anatirittena khādanīyena vā bhojanīyena vā abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāreti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has refused an invitation to eat more, and the donor perceives that he has, and he invites him to eat fresh or cooked food which is not leftover, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavārite vematiko anatirittena khādanīyena vā bhojanīyena vā abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāreti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has refused an invitation to eat more, but the donor is unsure of it, and he invites him to eat fresh or cooked food which is not leftover, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavārite appavāritasaññī anatirittena khādanīyena vā bhojanīyena vā abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāreti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has refused an invitation to eat more, but the donor does not perceive that he has, and he invites him to eat fresh or cooked food which is not leftover, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ āhāratthāya abhiharati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he invites him to eat post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics for the purpose of food, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vacanena “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, because of what he says, the other monk receives it with the intention of eating it, then the donor commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, the donor commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appavārite pavāritasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has not refused an invitation to eat more, but the donor perceives that he has, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appavārite vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has not refused an invitation to eat more, but the donor is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appavārite appavāritasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has not refused an invitation to eat more, and the donor does not perceive that he has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atirittaṁ kārāpetvā deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives it after having it made leftover; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atirittaṁ kārāpetvā bhuñjāhī”ti deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives it, saying, “Have it made leftover and then eat it;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya haranto gacchāhīti deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives it, saying, “Take this food for the benefit of someone else;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa sesakaṁ deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives the leftovers from a sick person; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ sati paccaye paribhuñjā”ti deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives, saying, “When there’s a reason, use these post-midday tonics,” “… use these seven-day tonics,” “… use  these lifetime tonics;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyapavāraṇāsikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule on invitations, the sixth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
