<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc17_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">17. Nikkaḍḍhanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">17. The training rule on throwing out </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū aññataraṁ paccantimaṁ mahāvihāraṁ paṭisaṅkharonti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of seventeen were repairing a large dwelling nearby, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha mayaṁ vassaṁ vasissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">intending to stay there for the rainy season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasaṁsu kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sattarasavaggiye bhikkhū vihāraṁ paṭisaṅkharonte.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six saw this </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ime, āvuso, sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū vihāraṁ paṭisaṅkharonti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These monks from the group of seventeen are repairing a dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handa ne vuṭṭhāpessāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Let’s throw them out.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekacce evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But some of them said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgamethāvuso, yāva paṭisaṅkharonti; paṭisaṅkhate vuṭṭhāpessāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Let’s wait until they’ve finished repairing it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sattarasavaggiye bhikkhū etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the monks from the group of six said to those from the group of seventeen, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“uṭṭhethāvuso, amhākaṁ vihāro pāpuṇātī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Leave, this dwelling is ours.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu, āvuso, paṭikacceva ācikkhitabbaṁ, mayañcaññaṁ paṭisaṅkhareyyāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Shouldn’t you have told us beforehand? We would’ve repaired another one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu, āvuso, saṅghiko vihāro”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Doesn’t this dwelling belong to the Sangha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāvuso, saṅghiko vihāro”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, it does.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Uṭṭhethāvuso, amhākaṁ vihāro pāpuṇātī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, leave! This dwelling is ours.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mahallako, āvuso, vihāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The dwelling is large. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhepi vasatha, mayampi vasissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You can stay here and so can we.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Uṭṭhethāvuso, amhākaṁ vihāro pāpuṇātī”ti kupitā anattamanā gīvāyaṁ gahetvā nikkaḍḍhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But they said, “Leave, this dwelling is ours,” and they grabbed them by the necks and threw them out in anger. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te nikkaḍḍhīyamānā rodanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of seventeen cried. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—“kissa tumhe, āvuso, rodathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When other monks asked them why, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ime, āvuso, chabbaggiyā bhikkhū kupitā anattamanā amhe saṅghikā vihārā nikkaḍḍhantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū kupitā anattamanā bhikkhū saṅghikā vihārā nikkaḍḍhissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six angrily throw other monks out of a dwelling belonging to the Sangha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, kupitā anattamanā bhikkhū saṅghikā vihārā nikkaḍḍhathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, kupitā anattamanā bhikkhū saṅghikā vihārā nikkaḍḍhissatha?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuṁ kupito anattamano saṅghikā vihārā nikkaḍḍheyya vā nikkaḍḍhāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk, in anger, throws a monk out of a dwelling belonging to the Sangha, or has him thrown out, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">…The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kupito anattamanoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">In anger: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anabhiraddho āhatacitto khilajāto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">discontent, having hatred, hostile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghiko nāma vihāro</span></p>
<p class="p3">A dwelling belonging to the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghassa dinno hoti pariccatto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">given to the Sangha, given up to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikkaḍḍheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Throws out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gabbhe gahetvā pamukhaṁ nikkaḍḍhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he takes hold of him in a room and throws him out to entryway, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamukhe gahetvā bahi nikkaḍḍhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes hold of him in the entryway and throws him outside, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekena payogena bahukepi dvāre atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even if he makes him go through many doors with a single effort, he commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikkaḍḍhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has thrown out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks another, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇatto bahukepi dvāre atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he only asks once, then even if the other makes him go through many doors, he commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike saṅghikasaññī kupito anattamano nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, and he perceives it as such, and in anger he throws him out, or has him thrown out, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike vematiko kupito anattamano nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he is unsure of it, and in anger he throws him out, or has him thrown out, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike puggalikasaññī kupito anattamano nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he perceives it as belonging to an individual, and in anger he throws him out, or has him thrown out, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he throws out one of his requisites, or he has it thrown out, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihārassa upacārā vā upaṭṭhānasālāya vā maṇḍapā vā rukkhamūlā vā ajjhokāsā vā nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he throws him out, or has him thrown out, from the vicinity of a dwelling, from an assembly hall, from under a roof-cover, from the foot of a tree, or from a space out in the open, he commits an offense of wrong conduct.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he throws out one of his requisites from any of these places, or he has it thrown out, he commits an offense of wrong conduct.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ vihārā vā vihārassa upacārā vā upaṭṭhānasālāya vā maṇḍapā vā rukkhamūlā vā ajjhokāsā vā nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he throws out one who is not fully ordained, or has them thrown out, from a dwelling, from the vicinity of a dwelling, from an assembly hall, from under a roof-cover, from the foot of a tree, or from a space out in the open, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he throws out one of their requisites from any of these places, or has it thrown out, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike saṅghikasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he perceives it as belonging to the Sangha, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike puggalikasaññī aññassa puggalike āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, and he perceives it as such, but that individual is not himself, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attano puggalike anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to himself, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">alajjiṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he throws out one who is shameless, or has him thrown out; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he throws out the requisites belonging to that person, or has them thrown out; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakaṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he throws out one who is insane, or has him thrown out; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he throws out the requisites belonging to that person, or has them thrown out; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhaṇḍanakārakaṁ kalahakārakaṁ vivādakārakaṁ bhassakārakaṁ saṅghe adhikaraṇakārakaṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he throws out one who is quarrelsome and argumentative, who creates legal issues in the Sangha, or has them thrown out; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he throws out the requisites belonging to that person, or has them thrown out; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antevāsikaṁ vā saddhivihārikaṁ vā na sammā vattantaṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he throws out a pupil or student who is not conducting himself properly, or has him thrown out; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he throws out the requisites belonging to such a person, or has them thrown out; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikkaḍḍhanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on throwing out, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
