<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc13_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">13. Ujjhāpanakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">13. The training rule on complaining </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā dabbo mallaputto saṅghassa senāsanañca paññapeti bhattāni ca uddisati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Dabba the Mallian was assigning the dwellings and designating the meals, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena mettiyabhūmajakā bhikkhū navakā ceva honti appapuññā ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks Mettiya and Bhūmajaka were newly ordained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni saṅghassa lāmakāni senāsanāni tāni tesaṁ pāpuṇanti lāmakāni ca bhattāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They had little merit, getting inferior dwellings and meals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te āyasmantaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ bhikkhū ujjhāpenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then complained about Dabba to other monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“chandāya dabbo mallaputto senāsanaṁ paññapeti, chandāya ca bhattāni uddisatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Dabba the Mallian assigns dwellings and designates meals based on favoritism.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma mettiyabhūmajakā bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ bhikkhū ujjhāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks Mettiya and Bhūmajaka complain about Venerable Dabba to other monks?”… </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ bhikkhū ujjhāpethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ bhikkhū ujjhāpessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ujjhāpanake pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk complains, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena mettiyabhūmajakā bhikkhū—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that the Buddha had prohibited complaining, the monks Mettiya and Bhūmajaka thought of other ways of getting the monks to hear about their grievances. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘bhagavatā ujjhāpanakaṁ paṭikkhittan’ti ‘ettāvatā bhikkhū sossantī’”ti bhikkhūnaṁ sāmantā āyasmantaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ khiyyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then criticized Dabba the Mallian in the vicinity of other monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“chandāya dabbo mallaputto senāsanaṁ paññapeti, chandāya ca bhattāni uddisatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Dabba assigns dwellings and designates meals based on favoritism.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma mettiyabhūmajakā bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ khiyyissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks Mettiya and Bhūmajaka criticize Venerable Dabba?”… </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ khiyyathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ khiyyissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ujjhāpanake khiyyanake pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk complains or criticizes, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujjhāpanakaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Complaining: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannaṁ saṅghena sammataṁ senāsanapaññāpakaṁ vā bhattuddesakaṁ vā yāgubhājakaṁ vā phalabhājakaṁ vā khajjabhājakaṁ vā appamattakavissajjakaṁ vā avaṇṇaṁ kattukāmo, ayasaṁ kattukāmo, maṅkukattukāmo, upasampannaṁ ujjhāpeti vā khiyyati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when someone who is fully ordained is the assigner of dwellings or the designator of meals or the distributor of rice porridge or the distributor of fruit or the distributor of fresh foods or the distributor of small requisites, and he has been appointed by the Sangha as such, then if a monk complains about him or criticizes him to one who is fully ordained—desiring to disparage him, desiring to give him a bad reputation, desiring to humiliate him—he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī ujjhāpanake khiyyanake āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, and he complains or criticizes, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko ujjhāpanake khiyyanake āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, and he complains or criticizes, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī ujjhāpanake khiyyanake āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as illegitimate, and he complains or criticizes, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ ujjhāpeti vā khiyyati vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he complains or criticizes him to one who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannaṁ saṅghena asammataṁ senāsanapaññāpakaṁ vā bhattuddesakaṁ vā yāgubhājakaṁ vā phalabhājakaṁ vā khajjabhājakaṁ vā appamattakavissajjakaṁ vā avaṇṇaṁ kattukāmo, ayasaṁ kattukāmo, maṅkukattukāmo, upasampannaṁ vā anupasampannaṁ vā ujjhāpeti vā khiyyati vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone who is fully ordained is the assigner of dwellings or the designator of meals or the distributor of rice porridge or the distributor of fruit or the distributor of fresh foods or the distributor of small requisites, but he has not been appointed by the Sangha as such, then if a monk complains about him or criticizes him to one who is fully ordained or to one who is not fully ordained—desiring to disparage him, desiring to give him a bad reputation, desiring to humiliate him—he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ saṅghena sammataṁ vā asammataṁ vā senāsanapaññāpakaṁ vā bhattuddesakaṁ vā yāgubhājakaṁ vā phalabhājakaṁ vā khajjabhājakaṁ vā appamattakavissajjakaṁ vā avaṇṇaṁ kattukāmo, ayasaṁ kattukāmo, maṅkukattukāmo, upasampannaṁ vā anupasampannaṁ vā ujjhāpeti vā khiyyati vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone who is not fully ordained is the assigner of dwellings or the designator of meals or the distributor of rice porridge or the distributor of fruit or the distributor of fresh foods or the distributor of small requisites, whether he has been appointed by the Sangha as such or not, then if a monk complains about him or criticizes him to one who is fully ordained or to one who is not fully ordained—desiring to disparage him, desiring to give him a bad reputation, desiring to humiliate him—he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as legitimate, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pakatiyā chandā dosā mohā bhayā karontaṁ ujjhāpeti vā khiyyati vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he complains about or criticizes one who regularly acts out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, or fear; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujjhāpanakasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on complaining, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
