<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc92_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on precious things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">92. Nandasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">92. The training rule on Nanda </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā nando bhagavato mātucchāputto abhirūpo hoti dassanīyo pāsādiko caturaṅgulomako bhagavatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time there was a handsome and graceful monk called Venerable Nanda, the Buddha’s cousin. He was 7 centimeters shorter than the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sugatacīvarappamāṇaṁ cīvaraṁ dhāreti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he wore a robe that was the same size as the Buddha’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasaṁsu kho therā bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ nandaṁ dūratova āgacchantaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the senior monks saw him coming, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavā āgacchatī”ti āsanā vuṭṭhahanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they thought it was the Buddha and got up from their seats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te upagate jānitvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But when he came close, they realized who it was, and they complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā nando sugatacīvarappamāṇaṁ cīvaraṁ dhāressatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Nanda wear a robe the same size as the Buddha’s?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, nanda, sugatacīvarappamāṇaṁ cīvaraṁ dhāresī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Nanda, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, nanda, sugatacīvarappamāṇaṁ cīvaraṁ dhāressasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nanda, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, nanda, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu sugatacīvarappamāṇaṁ cīvaraṁ kārāpeyya atirekaṁ vā, chedanakaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has a robe made that is the standard robe measure or larger, it is to be cut down, and he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṁ sugatassa sugatacīvarappamāṇaṁ—dīghaso nava vidatthiyo, sugatavidatthiyā; tiriyaṁ cha vidatthiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the standard robe measure: nine standard handspans long and six wide.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṁ sugatassa sugatacīvarappamāṇan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sugatacīvarappamāṇaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The standard robe measure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dīghaso nava vidatthiyo, sugatavidatthiyā; tiriyaṁ cha vidatthiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">nine standard handspans long and six wide. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has made: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karoti vā kārāpeti vā, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes one or has one made, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena chinditvā pācittiyaṁ desetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets it, it is to be cut down, and he is then to confess an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes himself what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññassatthāya karoti vā kārāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes one or has one made for the benefit of someone else, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gets one that was made by someone else and then uses it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakaṁ karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes it smaller than the standard robe; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā chinditvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets one made by another that is too large and then cuts it down before using it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitānaṁ vā bhūmattharaṇaṁ vā sāṇipākāraṁ vā bhisiṁ vā bibbohanaṁ vā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes a canopy, a floor cover, a cloth screen, a mattress, or a pillow; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on Nanda, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanavaggo navamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ninth sub-chapter on precious things is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rañño ca ratanaṁ santaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">King’s, and precious things, available, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sūci mañcañca tūlikaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Needle, and bed, cotton down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdanañca kaṇḍuñca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And sitting mat, and itch, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vassikā sugatena cāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Rainy-season, and by the standard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā kho, āyasmanto, dvenavuti pācittiyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, the ninety-two rules on confession have been recited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyasmante pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In regard to this I ask you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhetthāyasmanto, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You are pure in this and therefore silent. I will remember it thus.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khuddakaṁ samattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The section on minor rules has been completed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pācittiyakaṇḍaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The chapter on offenses entailing confession is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
