<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc58_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on drinking alcohol </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">58. Dubbaṇṇakaraṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">58. The training rule on making stains </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū ca paribbājakā ca sāketā sāvatthiṁ addhānamaggappaṭipannā honti. Antarāmagge corā nikkhamitvā te acchindiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a number of monks and wanderers were robbed while traveling from Sāketa to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyā rājabhaṭā nikkhamitvā te core sabhaṇḍe gahetvā bhikkhūnaṁ santike dūtaṁ pāhesuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The King’s men set out from Sāvatthī and caught the thieves and their loot. They then sent a message to the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgacchantu, bhadantā, sakaṁ sakaṁ cīvaraṁ sañjānitvā gaṇhantū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, please come and pick out your own robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū na sañjānanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the monks did not recognize them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The people complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhadantā attano attano cīvaraṁ na sañjānissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can they not recognize their own robes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā bhikkhūnaṁ tadanucchavikaṁ tadanulomikaṁ dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He had the Sangha gathered, gave a teaching on what is right and proper, and then addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tena hi, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññapessāmi dasa atthavase paṭicca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, monks, I will lay down a training rule for the following ten reasons: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghasuṭṭhutāya, saṅghaphāsutāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the well-being of the Sangha, for the comfort of the Sangha, for the restraint of bad people, for the ease of well-behaved monks, for the restraint of corruptions relating to the present life, for the restraint of corruptions relating to future lives, to give rise to confidence in those without it, to increase the confidence of those who have it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammaṭṭhitiyā, vinayānuggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the longevity of the true Teaching, and for supporting the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navaṁ pana bhikkhunā cīvaralābhena tiṇṇaṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇānaṁ aññataraṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇaṁ ādātabbaṁ—nīlaṁ vā kaddamaṁ vā kāḷasāmaṁ vā. Anādā ce bhikkhu tiṇṇaṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇānaṁ aññataraṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇaṁ navaṁ cīvaraṁ paribhuñjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When a monk gets a new robe, he should apply one of three kinds of stains: blue-green, mud-color, or dark brown. If a monk uses a new robe without applying any of the three kinds of stains, he commits an offense entailing confession.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">New: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akatakappaṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a mark has not been made is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiṇṇaṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇānaṁ aññataraṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇaṁ ādātabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should apply one of three kinds of stains: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antamaso kusaggenapi ādātabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">even if he just applies what fits on the tip of a blade of grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nīlaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Blue-green: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve nīlāni— kaṁsanīlaṁ, palāsanīlaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two kinds of blue-green: the color of copper-sulphate and the color of leaves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaddamo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Mud-color: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">odako vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">watery is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāḷasāmaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dark brown: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci kāḷasāmakaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever is dark brownish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādā ce bhikkhu tiṇṇaṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇānaṁ aññataraṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk … without applying any of the three kinds of stains: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antamaso kusaggenapi anādiyitvā tiṇṇaṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇānaṁ aññataraṁ dubbaṇṇakaraṇaṁ navaṁ cīvaraṁ paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he uses a new robe without first applying one of the three kinds of stains, even just the amount on the tip of a blade of grass, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādinne anādinnasaññī paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been applied, and he perceives that it has not, and he uses the robe, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādinne vematiko paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been applied, but he is unsure of it, and he uses the robe, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādinne ādinnasaññī paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been applied, but he perceives that it has, and he uses the robe, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādinne anādinnasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been applied, but he perceives that it has not, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādinne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been applied, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādinne ādinnasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been applied, and he perceives that it has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādiyitvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he applies the stain and then uses it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kappo naṭṭho hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the mark has disappeared; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kappakatokāso jiṇṇo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the area where the mark was applied is worn; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kappakatena akappakataṁ saṁsibbitaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if what had been marked is sewn together with what has not been marked; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aggaḷe,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a patch; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuvāte,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a lengthwise border; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paribhaṇḍe,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a crosswise border; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbaṇṇakaraṇasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on making stains, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
