<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc22_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">22. Atthaṅgatasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">22. The training rule on set </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadanti pariyāyena. Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato cūḷapanthakassa pariyāyo hoti bhikkhuniyo ovadituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the senior monks were taking turns instructing the nuns. Then, on one occasion, it was the turn of Venerable Cūḷapanthaka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo evamāhaṁsu—“na dāni ajja ovādo iddho bhavissati, taññeva dāni udānaṁ ayyo cūḷapanthako punappunaṁ bhaṇissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns said, “Today the instruction won’t be effective. Venerable Cūḷapanthaka will just be repeating the same thing over and over.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo yenāyasmā cūḷapanthako tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ cūḷapanthakaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards those nuns went to Cūḷapanthaka, bowed, and sat down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ nisinnā kho tā bhikkhuniyo āyasmā cūḷapanthako etadavoca—“samaggāttha, bhaginiyo”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cūḷapanthaka then said to them, “Are you all here, Sisters?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Samaggāmhāyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We’re all here, Venerable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vattanti, bhaginiyo, aṭṭha garudhammā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are you keeping the eight important principles?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vattantāyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We are.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eso, bhaginiyo, ovādo”ti niyyādetvā imaṁ udānaṁ punappunaṁ abhāsi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After saying, “This is the instruction,” he uttered the same heartfelt exclamation again and again: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Adhicetaso appamajjato,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“For the heedful one possessed of the higher mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Munino monapathesu sikkhato;</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the sage training on the path to sagacity—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sokā na bhavanti tādino,</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are no sorrows for such a one, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasantassa sadā satīmato”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The peaceful one, who is always mindful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo evamāhaṁsu—“nanu avocumhā—na dāni ajja ovādo iddho bhavissati, taññeva dāni udānaṁ ayyo cūḷapanthako punappunaṁ bhaṇissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the nuns said, “Didn’t we say that the instruction wouldn’t be effective, that Venerable Cūḷapanthaka would just be repeating the same thing over and over?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho āyasmā cūḷapanthako tāsaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ imaṁ kathāsallāpaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cūḷapanthaka overheard that conversation between the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā cūḷapanthako vehāsaṁ abbhuggantvā ākāse antalikkhe caṅkamatipi tiṭṭhatipi nisīdatipi seyyampi kappeti dhūmāyatipi pajjalatipi antaradhāyatipi, tañceva udānaṁ bhaṇati aññañca bahuṁ buddhavacanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then rose up into the air, walked back and forth in space, and he stood, sat down, and lay down there. He emitted smoke and fire, and he disappeared, all the while uttering the same heartfelt exclamation and many other sayings by the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṁ vata bho, abbhutaṁ vata bho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s astonishing and amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na vata no ito pubbe ovādo evaṁ iddho bhūtapubbo yathā ayyassa cūḷapanthakassā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">No previous instruction has been as effective as this one from Venerable Cūḷapanthaka!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā cūḷapanthako tā bhikkhuniyo yāva samandhakārā ovaditvā uyyojesi—“gacchatha, bhaginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And Cūḷapanthaka kept on instructing those nuns until the dark of night and then dismissed them, saying, “Go, Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo nagaradvāre thakite bahinagare vasitvā kālasseva nagaraṁ pavisanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But because the gates to town were closed, those nuns spent the night outside and only entered early in the morning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—“abrahmacāriniyo imā bhikkhuniyo;</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, “These nuns aren’t celibate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāme bhikkhūhi saddhiṁ vasitvā idāni nagaraṁ pavisantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They spend the night in the monastery with the monks and only now do they enter town.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized Cūḷapanthaka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā cūḷapanthako atthaṅgate sūriye bhikkhuniyo ovadissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Cūḷapanthaka instruct the nuns after the sun has set?”… </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, cūḷapanthaka, atthaṅgate sūriye bhikkhuniyo ovadasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Cūḷapanthaka, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, cūḷapanthaka, atthaṅgate sūriye bhikkhuniyo ovadissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Cūḷapanthaka, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, cūḷapanthaka, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sammatopi ce bhikkhu atthaṅgate sūriye bhikkhuniyo ovadeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Even if he has been appointed, if a monk instructs the nuns after sunset, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammato nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has been appointed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñatticatutthena kammena sammato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has been appointed through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthaṅgate sūriyeti</span></p>
<p class="p3">After sunset: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">oggate sūriye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">after the sun has gone down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they have been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovadeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Instructs: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhahi vā garudhammehi aññena vā dhammena ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he instructs in the eight important principles or he gives any other teaching, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthaṅgate atthaṅgatasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the sun has set, and he perceives that it has, and he instructs the nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthaṅgate vematiko ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the sun has set, but he is unsure of it, and he instructs the nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthaṅgate anatthaṅgatasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the sun has set, but he perceives that it has not, and he instructs the nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoupasampannāya ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he instructs a nun who is fully ordained only on one side, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anatthaṅgate atthaṅgatasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the sun has not set, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anatthaṅgate vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the sun has not set, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anatthaṅgate anatthaṅgatasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the sun has not set, and he perceives that it has not, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddesaṁ dento,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he recites; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paripucchaṁ dento,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he tests them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“osārehi ayyā”ti vuccamāno, osāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he recites when asked to do so; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañhaṁ pucchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks a question; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañhaṁ puṭṭho katheti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he replies when asked a question; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya bhaṇantaṁ bhikkhuniyo suṇanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is speaking for the benefit of someone else and the nuns listen in; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhamānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is to a trainee nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇeriyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is to a novice nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthaṅgatasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on set, the second, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
