<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc15_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">15. Dutiyasenāsanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">15. The second training rule on furniture </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū sahāyakā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of seventeen were friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te vasantāpi ekatova vasanti, pakkamantāpi ekatova pakkamanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The lived together, and when going somewhere they would leave together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te aññatarasmiṁ saṅghike vihāre seyyaṁ santharitvā taṁ pakkamantā neva uddhariṁsu na uddharāpesuṁ, anāpucchā pakkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion they put out bedding in a dwelling belonging to the Sangha, but then departed without putting it away, having it put away, or taking leave. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Senāsanaṁ upacikāhi khāyitaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The furniture was eaten by termites. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū saṅghike vihāre seyyaṁ santharitvā taṁ pakkamantā neva uddharissanti na uddharāpessanti, anāpucchā pakkamissanti, senāsanaṁ upacikāhi khāyitan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those monks from the group of seventeen put out bedding in a dwelling belonging to the Sangha, and then depart without putting it away, getting it put away, or taking leave? The furniture was eaten by termites.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū sattarasavaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū saṅghike vihāre seyyaṁ santharitvā taṁ pakkamantā neva uddhariṁsu na uddharāpesuṁ, anāpucchā pakkamiṁsu, senāsanaṁ upacikāhi khāyitan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that those monks did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā saṅghike vihāre seyyaṁ santharitvā taṁ pakkamantā neva uddharissanti na uddharāpessanti, anāpucchā pakkamissanti, senāsanaṁ upacikāhi khāyitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu saṅghike vihāre seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya, anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk puts out bedding in a dwelling belonging to the Sangha, or has it put out, and he then departs without putting it away, having it put away, or taking leave, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">…The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghiko nāma vihāro</span></p>
<p class="p3">A dwelling belonging to the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghassa dinno hoti pariccatto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">given to the Sangha, given up to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bedding: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhisi, cimilikā uttarattharaṇaṁ, bhūmattharaṇaṁ, taṭṭikā, cammakhaṇḍo, nisīdanaṁ, paccattharaṇaṁ, tiṇasanthāro, paṇṇasanthāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a mattress, a mat underlay, a bedspread, a floor cover, a straw mat, a hide, a sitting mat, a sheet, a spread of grass, a spread of leaves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santharitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Puts out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ santharitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">puts out oneself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santharāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has put out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ santharāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gets another to put out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Departs without putting it away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sayaṁ uddhareyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he does not put it away himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na uddharāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Having it put away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññaṁ uddharāpeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he does not get another to put it away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Or taking leave: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuṁ vā sāmaṇeraṁ vā ārāmikaṁ vā anāpucchā parikkhittassa ārāmassa parikkhepaṁ atikkamantassa āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not take leave of a monk, a novice monk, or a monastery worker, and he crosses the boundary of an enclosed monastery, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittassa ārāmassa upacāraṁ atikkamantassa āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he goes beyond the vicinity of an unenclosed monastery, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike saṅghikasaññī seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya, anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, and he perceives it as such, and he puts out bedding there or has it put out, and he then departs without putting it away or having it put away or taking leave, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike vematiko seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya, anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he is unsure of it, and he puts out bedding there or has it put out, and he then departs without putting it away or having it put away or taking leave, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike puggalikasaññī seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya, anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he perceives it as belonging to an individual, and he puts out bedding there or has it put out, and he then departs without putting it away or having it put away or taking leave, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihārassa upacāre vā upaṭṭhānasālāyaṁ vā maṇḍape vā rukkhamūle vā seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya, anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he puts out bedding, or has it put out, in the vicinity of a dwelling, in the assembly hall, under a roof-cover, or at the foot of a tree, and he then departs without putting it away or having it put away or taking leave, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañcaṁ vā pīṭhaṁ vā vihāre vā vihārassūpacāre vā upaṭṭhānasālāyaṁ vā maṇḍape vā rukkhamūle vā santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya, anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he puts out a bed or a bench, or has it put out, in a dwelling, in the vicinity of a dwelling, in the assembly hall, under a roof-cover, or at the foot of a tree, and he then departs without putting it away or having it put away or taking leave, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike saṅghikasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he perceives it as belonging to the Sangha, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike puggalikasaññī aññassa puggalike āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, and he perceives it as such, but that individual is not himself, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attano puggalike anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to himself, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddharitvā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he departs after putting it away; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddharāpetvā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he departs after having it put away; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpucchaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he departs after taking leave; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kenaci palibuddhaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the bedding is obstructed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāpekkho gantvā tattha ṭhito āpucchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he abandons his intention to return, and at that spot takes leave; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kenaci palibuddho hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is obstructed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasenāsanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule on furniture, the fifth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
