<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc52_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on drinking alcohol </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">52. Aṅgulipatodakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">52. The training rule on tickling </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sattarasavaggiyaṁ bhikkhuṁ aṅgulipatodakena hāsesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six tickled one of the monks from the group of seventeen to make him laugh. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu uttanto anassāsako kālamakāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not being able to catch his breath, he died. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhuṁ aṅgulipatodakena hāsessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six tickle a monk to make him laugh?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṁ aṅgulipatodakena hāsethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhuṁ aṅgulipatodakena hāsessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṅgulipatodake pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk tickles someone, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṅgulipatodako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Tickles another: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampanno upasampannaṁ hasādhippāyo kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if one who is fully ordained touches another who is fully ordained, body to body, with the aim of making him laugh, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī aṅgulipatodakena hāseti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and he perceives him as such, and he tickles him to make him laugh, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko aṅgulipatodakena hāseti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he tickles him to make him laugh, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī aṅgulipatodakena hāseti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but he does not perceive him as such, and he tickles him to make him laugh, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, with his own body, he touches what is connected to the other monk’s body, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, with what is connected to his own body, he touches the other monk’s body, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, with what is connected to his own body, he touches what is connected to the other monk’s body, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, by releasing something, he touches the other monk’s body, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, by releasing something, he touches what is connected to the other monk’s body, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, by releasing something, he touches what is released by the other monk, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, with his own body, he touches the body of someone who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, with his own body, he touches what is connected to the body of someone who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, with what is connected to his own body, he touches the body of someone who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, with what is connected to his own body, he touches what is connected to the body of someone who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, by releasing something, he touches the body of someone who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, by releasing something, he touches what is connected to the body of someone who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, by releasing something, he touches what is released by the someone who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na hasādhippāyo,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not aiming to make him laugh; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati karaṇīye āmasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he touches him when there is a need; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṅgulipatodakasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on tickling, the second, is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
