<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc6_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">6. Dutiyasahaseyyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">6. The second training rule on the same sleeping place </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā anuruddho kosalesu janapade sāvatthiṁ gacchanto sāyaṁ aññataraṁ gāmaṁ upagacchi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Anuruddha was walking through the Kosalan country on his way to Sāvatthī, when one evening he arrived at a certain village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena tasmiṁ gāme aññatarissā itthiyā āvasathāgāraṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then a woman in that village had prepared her guesthouse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā anuruddho yena sā itthī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—“sace te, bhagini, agaru, vaseyyāma ekarattaṁ āvasathāgāre”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Anuruddha went to that woman and said, “If it’s not inconvenient for you, I’d like to stay in your guesthouse for one night.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vaseyyātha, bhante”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please stay, Venerable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññepi addhikā yena sā itthī tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ itthiṁ etadavocuṁ—“sace te, ayye, agaru vaseyyāma ekarattaṁ āvasathāgāre”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other travelers also went to that woman and said, “Madam, if it’s not troublesome for you, we’d like to stay in your guesthouse for one night.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eso kho ayyo samaṇo paṭhamaṁ upagato; sace so anujānāti, vaseyyāthā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sirs, a monastic is already staying there. If he agrees, you may stay.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te addhikā yenāyasmā anuruddho tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ etadavocuṁ—“sace te, bhante, agaru, vaseyyāma ekarattaṁ āvasathāgāre”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those travelers then approached Anuruddha and said, “If you don’t mind, Venerable, we’d like to stay one night in the guesthouse.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vaseyyātha, āvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No problem.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī āyasmante anuruddhe saha dassanena paṭibaddhacittā ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now as soon as that woman had seen Anuruddha, she had fallen in love with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī yenāyasmā anuruddho tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ etadavoca—“ayyo, bhante, imehi manussehi ākiṇṇo na phāsu viharissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She now went to him and said, “Sir, you won’t be comfortable surrounded by these people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhāhaṁ, bhante, ayyassa mañcakaṁ abbhantaraṁ paññapeyyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I prepare a bed for you in the main house?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi kho āyasmā anuruddho tuṇhībhāvena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Anuruddha consented by remaining silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī āyasmato anuruddhassa mañcakaṁ abbhantaraṁ paññapetvā alaṅkatappaṭiyattā gandhagandhinī yenāyasmā anuruddho tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After preparing a bed in the main house, she put on jewelery and perfume, and she went to Anuruddha and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo, bhante, abhirūpo dassanīyo pāsādiko, ahañcamhi abhirūpā dassanīyā pāsādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re attractive, Sir, and so am I. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhāhaṁ, bhante, ayyassa pajāpati bhaveyyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t you take me as your wife?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vutte, āyasmā anuruddho tuṇhī ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But Anuruddha remained silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">She said the same thing a second time, but again got no response. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho sā itthī āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And a third time she said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyo, bhante, abhirūpo dassanīyo pāsādiko, ahañcamhi abhirūpā dassanīyā pāsādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re attractive, Sir, and so am I. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhante, ayyo mañceva paṭicchatu sabbañca sāpateyyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t you take me and all this property?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho āyasmā anuruddho tuṇhī ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Once again Anuruddha remained silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī sāṭakaṁ nikkhipitvā āyasmato anuruddhassa purato caṅkamatipi tiṭṭhatipi nisīdatipi seyyampi kappeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She then threw off her wrap, and she walked back and forth, stood, sat down, and lay down in front of him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā anuruddho indriyāni okkhipitvā taṁ itthiṁ neva olokesi napi ālapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But Anuruddha controlled his senses and neither looked at nor spoke to her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī—“acchariyaṁ vata bho, abbhutaṁ vata bho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that woman said, “It’s astonishing and amazing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahū me manussā satenapi sahassenapi pahiṇanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Many people pay a hundred or a thousand coins to be with me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ pana samaṇo—mayā sāmaṁ yāciyamāno—na icchati mañceva paṭicchituṁ sabbañca sāpateyyan”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">But this monastic doesn’t want me and all this property, even when I beg him!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāṭakaṁ nivāsetvā āyasmato anuruddhassa pādesu sirasā nipatitvā āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After dressing, she bowed down with her head at Anuruddha’s feet and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“accayo maṁ, bhante, accagamā yathābālaṁ yathāmūḷhaṁ yathāakusalaṁ yāhaṁ evamakāsiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’ve made a mistake. I’ve been foolish, confused, and unskillful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā me, bhante, ayyo accayaṁ accayato paṭiggaṇhātu āyatiṁ saṁvarāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please forgive me so that I may restrain myself in the future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha tvaṁ, bhagini, accayo accagamā yathābālaṁ yathāmūḷhaṁ yathāakusalaṁ yā tvaṁ evamakāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You have certainly made a mistake. You’ve been foolish, confused, and unskillful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho tvaṁ, bhagini, accayaṁ accayato disvā yathādhammaṁ paṭikarosi, taṁ te mayaṁ paṭiggaṇhāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But since you acknowledge your mistake and make proper amends, I forgive you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuddhi hesā, bhagini, ariyassa vinaye yo accayaṁ accayato disvā yathādhammaṁ paṭikaroti āyatiñca saṁvaraṁ āpajjatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For this is called growth in the training of the noble ones: acknowledging a mistake, making proper amends, and undertaking restraint for the future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī tassā rattiyā accayena āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappetvā sampavāretvā, āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ bhuttāviṁ onītapattapāṇiṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The following morning that woman personally served and satisfied Anuruddha with various kinds of fine food. When he had finished his meal, she bowed and sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ nisinnaṁ kho taṁ itthiṁ āyasmā anuruddho dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṁsesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And Anuruddha instructed, inspired, and gladdened her with a teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī—āyasmatā anuruddhena dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṁsitā—āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She then said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṁ, bhante, abhikkantaṁ, bhante.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wonderful, Sir, wonderful! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, nikkujjitaṁ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṁ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṁ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṁ dhāreyya—‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as one might set upright what had been overturned, or reveal what had been hidden, or show the way to one who was lost, or bring a lamp into the darkness so that one with eyes might see what is there—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṁ ayyena anuruddhena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">even so have you made the Teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṁ, bhante, taṁ bhagavantaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Teaching, and the Sangha of monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsikaṁ maṁ ayyo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṁ saraṇaṁ gatan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please accept me as a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā anuruddho sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards, after arriving at Sāvatthī, Anuruddha told the monks what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā anuruddho mātugāmena sahaseyyaṁ kappessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Anuruddha lie down in the same sleeping place as a woman?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Anuruddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, anuruddha, mātugāmena sahaseyyaṁ kappesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Anuruddha, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe… kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, anuruddha, mātugāmena sahaseyyaṁ kappessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … “Anuruddha, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, anuruddha, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu mātugāmena sahaseyyaṁ kappeyya pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk lies down in the same sleeping place as a woman, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussitthī, na yakkhī, na petī, na tiracchānagatā; antamaso tadahujātāpi dārikā, pageva mahattarī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human female, not a female spirit, not a female ghost, not a female animal; even a girl born on that very day, let alone an older one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Same: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sleeping place: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbacchannā, sabbaparicchannā, yebhuyyenacchannā, yebhuyyena paricchannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">fully roofed, fully walled; mostly roofed, mostly walled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyaṁ kappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lies down in the same sleeping place: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthaṅgate sūriye—</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the sun has set—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme nipanne bhikkhu nipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monk lies down when the woman is already lying down, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu nipanne mātugāmo nipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the woman lies down when the monk is already lying down, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho vā nipajjanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they both lie down together, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṭṭhahitvā punappunaṁ nipajjanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">every time they get up and then lie down again, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme mātugāmasaññī sahaseyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, and he perceives her as such, and he lies down in the same sleeping place as her, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme vematiko sahaseyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, but he is unsure of it, and he lies down in the same sleeping place as her, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme amātugāmasaññī sahaseyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, but he does not perceive her as such, and he lies down in the same sleeping place as her, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upaḍḍhacchanne upaḍḍhaparicchanne, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is half-roofed and half-walled, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yakkhiyā vā petiyā vā paṇḍakena vā tiracchānagatitthiyā vā sahaseyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he lies down in the same sleeping place as a female spirit, a female ghost, a _paṇḍaka_, or a female animal, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme mātugāmasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme amātugāmasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, and he does not perceive them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbacchanne sabbaaparicchanne,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is fully roofed, but not walled; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaparicchanne sabbaacchanne,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is fully walled, but not roofed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena acchanne,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is mostly not roofed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena aparicchanne,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is mostly not walled; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātugāme nipanne bhikkhu nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monk sits when the woman is lying down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu nipanne mātugāmo nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the woman sits when the monk is lying down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho vā nisīdanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they both sit down together; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasahaseyyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule on the same sleeping place, the sixth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
