<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pd3_root-pli-ms.j. Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">3. Tatiyapāṭidesanīyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">3. The third training rule on acknowledgment </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṁ aññataraṁ kulaṁ ubhatopasannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time in Sāvatthī there was a family where both the husband and the wife had confidence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhāya vaḍḍhati, bhogena hāyati, yaṁ tasmiṁ kule uppajjati purebhattaṁ khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā taṁ sabbaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ vissajjetvā appekadā anasitā acchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They were growing in faith, but declining in wealth. Whatever food they had in the morning, they gave to the monks. Sometimes they went without food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā na mattaṁ jānitvā paṭiggahessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics not have a sense of moderation in receiving offerings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime imesaṁ datvā appekadā anasitā acchantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving to them, these people sometimes go without.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, yaṁ kulaṁ saddhāya vaḍḍhati, bhogena hāyati evarūpassa kulassa ñattidutiyena kammena sekkhasammutiṁ dātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, if a family’s faith is growing, but its wealth is declining, I allow you to designate it as ‘in training’, through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and one announcement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the designation should be given like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable monk should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthannāmaṁ kulaṁ saddhāya vaḍḍhati, bhogena hāyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such-and-such a family is growing in faith, but declining in wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmassa kulassa sekkhasammutiṁ dadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should designate that family as “in training”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthannāmaṁ kulaṁ saddhāya vaḍḍhati, bhogena hāyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such-and-such a family is growing in faith, but declining in wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmassa kulassa sekkhasammutiṁ deti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha designates that family as “in training”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa kulassa sekkhasammutiyā dānaṁ, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of designating that family as “in training” should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dinnā saṅghena itthannāmassa kulassa sekkhasammuti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha designates such-and-such a family as “in training”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kho pana tāni sekkhasammatāni kulāni, yo pana bhikkhu tathārūpesu sekkhasammatesu kulesu khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, paṭidesetabbaṁ tena bhikkhunā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are families that are designated as “in training”. If a monk eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from such a family, he must acknowledge it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gārayhaṁ, āvuso, dhammaṁ āpajjiṁ asappāyaṁ pāṭidesanīyaṁ taṁ paṭidesemī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have done a blameworthy and unsuitable thing that is to be acknowledged. I acknowledge it.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṁ ussavo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards there was a celebration in Sāvatthī </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā bhikkhū nimantetvā bhojenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and people invited the monks for a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tampi kho kulaṁ bhikkhū nimantesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so did the family that had been designated as in training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū kukkuccāyantā nādhivāsenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭikkhittaṁ bhagavatā sekkhasammatesu kulesu khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādituṁ bhuñjitun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But knowing that the Buddha had prohibited eating fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from such a family, and being afraid of wrongdoing, the monks did not accept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That family complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ nu kho nāma amhākaṁ jīvitena yaṁ ayyā amhākaṁ na paṭiggaṇhantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is it with us that they don’t receive from us?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, nimantitena sekkhasammatesu kulesu khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādituṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, if you have been invited, I allow you to eat fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from a family designated as in training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kho pana tāni sekkhasammatāni kulāni, yo pana bhikkhu tathārūpesu sekkhasammatesu kulesu pubbe animantito khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, paṭidesetabbaṁ tena bhikkhunā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are families that are designated as “in training”. If a monk, without first being invited, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from such a family, he must acknowledge it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gārayhaṁ, āvuso, dhammaṁ āpajjiṁ asappāyaṁ pāṭidesanīyaṁ, taṁ paṭidesemī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have done a blameworthy and unsuitable thing that is to be acknowledged. I acknowledge it.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu tassa kulassa kulūpako hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a certain monk was associating with that family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena taṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One morning he robed up, took his bowl and robe, went to them, and sat down on the prepared seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena so bhikkhu gilāno hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then that monk was sick, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te manussā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and so they invited him to eat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhuñjatha, bhante”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ animantitena sekkhasammatesu kulesu khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādituṁ bhuñjitun”ti kukkuccāyanto na paṭiggahesi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">But knowing that the Buddha had prohibited an uninvited monk from eating fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from such a family, and being afraid of wrongdoing, he did not accept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāsakkhi piṇḍāya carituṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And being unable to walk for alms, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chinnabhatto ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he missed his meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu ārāmaṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then returned to the monastery and told the monks what had happened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānena bhikkhunā sekkhasammatesu kulesu khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādituṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a sick monk to eat fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from a family designated as in training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kho pana tāni sekkhasammatāni kulāni, yo pana bhikkhu tathārūpesu sekkhasammatesu kulesu pubbe animantito agilāno khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, paṭidesetabbaṁ tena bhikkhunā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are families that are designated as “in training”. If a monk, without being sick and without first being invited, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from such a family, he must acknowledge it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gārayhaṁ, āvuso, dhammaṁ āpajjiṁ asappāyaṁ pāṭidesanīyaṁ, taṁ paṭidesemī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have done a blameworthy and unsuitable thing that is to be acknowledged. I acknowledge it.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kho pana tāni sekkhasammatāni kulānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are families that are designated as “in training”: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sekkhasammataṁ nāma kulaṁ yaṁ kulaṁ saddhāya vaḍḍhati, bhogena hāyati. Evarūpassa kulassa ñattidutiyena kammena sekkhasammuti dinnā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a family designated as in training: a family in which the faith is growing but the wealth is declining. Such a family is designated as “in training” through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and one announcement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathārūpesu sekkhasammatesu kulesūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a family: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evarūpesu sekkhasammatesu kulesu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that kind of family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Animantito nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without being invited: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjatanāya vā svātanāya vā animantito, gharūpacāraṁ okkamante nimanteti, eso animantito nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">not invited for later on the same day or for the following day, but only after entering the vicinity of the house—this is called “without being invited”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantito nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Invited: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjatanāya vā svātanāya vā nimantito, gharūpacāraṁ anokkamante nimanteti, eso nimantito nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">invited for later on the same day or for the following day, but not after entering the vicinity of the house—this is called “invited”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without being sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkoti piṇḍāya carituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is able to walk for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkoti piṇḍāya carituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is unable to walk for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, the post-midday tonics, the seven-day tonics, and the lifetime tonics—the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour  products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Animantito agilāno “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, without being sick and without being invited, he receives fresh or cooked food with the intention of eating it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sekkhasammate sekkhasammatasaññī animantito agilāno khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a family is designated as in training, and he perceives it as such, and he, without being sick and without being invited, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from that family, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sekkhasammate vematiko …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a family is designated as in training, but he is unsure of it, and he, without being sick and without being invited, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from that family, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sekkhasammate asekkhasammatasaññī animantito agilāno khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a family is designated as in training, but he does not perceive it as such, and he, without being sick and without being invited, eats fresh or cooked food after personally receiving it from that family, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ āhāratthāya paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics for the purpose of food, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asekkhasammate sekkhasammatasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a family is not designated as in training, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asekkhasammate vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a family is not designated as in training, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asekkhasammate asekkhasammatasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a family is not designated as in training, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nimantitassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has been invited; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nimantitassa vā gilānassa vā sesakaṁ bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats the leftovers from one who has been invited or who is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññesaṁ bhikkhā tattha paññattā hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if other people’s almsfood is prepared there; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gharato nīharitvā denti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they give after coming out from the house; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niccabhatte,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a regular meal invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">salākabhatte,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a meal for which lots are drawn; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pakkhike,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a half-monthly meal; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uposathike,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is on the observance day; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭipadike,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is on the day after the observance day; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ— “sati paccaye paribhuñjā”ti deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the family gives post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics, saying, “Use these when there’s a reason;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyapāṭidesanīyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third training rule on acknowledgment is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
