<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk58_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surusuruvagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on slurping </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">58. Daṇḍapāṇisikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">58. The training rule on holding a staff </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū daṇḍapāṇissa dhammaṁ desenti …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six gave teachings to people holding staffs. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na daṇḍapāṇissa agilānassa dhammaṁ desessāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘I will not give a teaching to anyone holding a staff who is not sick,’ this is how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daṇḍo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A staff: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhimassa purisassa catuhattho daṇḍo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a stick measuring 1.6 meters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ukkaṭṭho adaṇḍo, omako adaṇḍo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is longer than that is not a staff, nor what is shorter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na daṇḍapāṇissa agilānassa dhammo desetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should not give a teaching to anyone holding a staff who is not sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca daṇḍapāṇissa agilānassa dhammaṁ deseti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk out, of disrespect, gives a teaching to someone holding a staff who is not sick, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
