<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk56_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surusuruvagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on slurping </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">56. Sasitthakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">56. The training rule on containing rice </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā bhaggesu viharati susumāragire bhesakaḷāvane migadāye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying in the Bhagga country at Susumāragira in the Bhesakaḷā Grove, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū kokanade pāsāde sasitthakaṁ pattadhovanaṁ antaraghare chaḍḍenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks in the Kokanada stilt house were discarding their bowl-washing water containing rice in inhabited areas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā sasitthakaṁ pattadhovanaṁ antaraghare chaḍḍessanti, seyyathāpi gihī kāmabhogino”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics discard their bowl-washing water containing rice in inhabited areas? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū sasitthakaṁ pattadhovanaṁ antaraghare chaḍḍessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those monks do this?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū sasitthakaṁ pattadhovanaṁ antaraghare chaḍḍentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that they do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā sasitthakaṁ pattadhovanaṁ antaraghare chaḍḍessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na sasitthakaṁ pattadhovanaṁ antaraghare chaḍḍessāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘“I will not discard bowl-washing water containing rice in inhabited areas,” this is how you should train.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sasitthakaṁ pattadhovanaṁ antaraghare chaḍḍetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should not discard bowl-washing water containing rice in an inhabited area. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca sasitthakaṁ pattadhovanaṁ antaraghare chaḍḍeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk, out of disrespect, discards bowl-washing water containing rice in an inhabited area, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddharitvā vā bhinditvā vā paṭiggahe vā nīharitvā vā chaḍḍeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he discards it after removing the rice, after breaking it up, into a container, or after taking it outside; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
