<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pārājikakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing expulsion </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pj5_root-pli-ms.j. Pārājikakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing expulsion </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">5. Ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalikāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">5. The training rule on above the knees </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Namo tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammāsambuddhassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Homage to the Buddha, the Perfected One, the fully Awakened One </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāḷho migāranattā bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihāraṁ kattukāmo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Migāra’s grandson Sāḷha wanted to build a dwelling for the Sangha of nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāḷho migāranattā bhikkhuniyo upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He went to the nuns and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“icchāmahaṁ, ayye, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihāraṁ kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, I wish to build a dwelling for the Sangha of nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Detha me navakammikaṁ bhikkhunin”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please give me the nun in charge of building work.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena catasso bhaginiyo bhikkhunīsu pabbajitā honti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time four sisters had gone forth as nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nandā, nandavatī, sundarīnandā, thullanandāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nandā, Nandavatī, Sundarīnandā, and Thullanandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāsu sundarīnandā bhikkhunī taruṇapabbajitā abhirūpā hoti dassanīyā pāsādikā paṇḍitā byattā medhāvinī dakkhā analasā, tatrupāyāya vīmaṁsāya samannāgatā, alaṁ kātuṁ alaṁ saṁvidhātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Of these, the nun Sundarīnandā had gone forth when she was young, and she was beautiful, intelligent, skilled, and diligent, and she possessed good judgment in regard to doing and arranging things well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhikkhunisaṅgho sundarīnandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ sammannitvā sāḷhassa migāranattuno navakammikaṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After appointing Sundarīnandā to be in charge of building work, the Sangha made her work with Sāḷha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sundarīnandā bhikkhunī sāḷhassa migāranattuno nivesanaṁ abhikkhaṇaṁ gacchati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a consequence of this, Sundarīnandā would often go to Sāḷha’s house to ask for tools, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vāsiṁ detha, parasuṁ detha, kuṭhāriṁ detha, kudālaṁ detha, nikhādanaṁ dethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whether an adz, a hatchet, an ax, a spade, or a chisel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāḷhopi migāranattā bhikkhunupassayaṁ abhikkhaṇaṁ gacchati katākataṁ jānituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And Sāḷha would often go to the nuns’ dwelling place to find out about the progress of the building work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te abhiṇhadassanena paṭibaddhacittā ahesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And because they saw each other frequently, they fell in love. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāḷho migāranattā sundarīnandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ dūsetuṁ okāsaṁ alabhamāno etadevaatthāya bhikkhunisaṅghassa bhattaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But because Sāḷha could not find any opportunity to be intimate with Sundarīnandā, he invited the Sangha of nuns for a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāḷho migāranattā bhattagge āsanaṁ paññapento “ettakā bhikkhuniyo ayyāya sundarīnandāya vuḍḍhatarā”ti—ekamantaṁ āsanaṁ paññapesi “ettakā navakatarā”ti—ekamantaṁ āsanaṁ paññapesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When preparing the seats in the dining hall, he counted the number of nuns senior to Venerable Sundarīnandā and placed their seats to one side, and he counted the number of nuns junior to her and placed their seat on the other side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭicchanne okāse nikūṭe sundarīnandāya bhikkhuniyā āsanaṁ paññapesi, yathā therā bhikkhuniyo jāneyyuṁ—“navakānaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ santike nisinnā”ti; navakāpi bhikkhuniyo jāneyyuṁ—“therānaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ santike nisinnā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then placed Sundarīnandā’s seat in a concealed spot in a corner. In this way the senior nuns would think she was seated close to the junior ones and the junior nuns would think she was seated close to the senior ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāḷho migāranattā bhikkhunisaṅghassa kālaṁ ārocāpesi—“kālo, ayye, niṭṭhitaṁ bhattan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards he informed the Sangha that the meal was ready. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sundarīnandā bhikkhunī sallakkhetvā—“na bahukato sāḷho migāranattā bhikkhunisaṅghassa bhattaṁ akāsi; maṁ so dūsetukāmo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sundarīnandā thought, “Sāḷha hasn’t prepared a meal for the Sangha as a service, but because he wants to be intimate with me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacāhaṁ gamissāmi vissaro me bhavissatī”ti, antevāsiniṁ bhikkhuniṁ āṇāpesi—“gaccha me piṇḍapātaṁ nīhara.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If I go, I will get into trouble.” She then told a nun who was her pupil, “Go and bring back almsfood for me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ce maṁ pucchati, ‘gilānā’ti paṭivedehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If anyone asks about me, tell them I’m sick.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ, ayye”ti kho sā bhikkhunī sundarīnandāya bhikkhuniyā paccassosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Venerable,” she replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāḷho migāranattā bahidvārakoṭṭhake ṭhito hoti sundarīnandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ paṭipucchanto—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards Sāḷha was standing outside the gateway of his house repeatedly inquiring after Sundarīnandā: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kahaṁ, ayye, ayyā sundarīnandā? Kahaṁ, ayye, ayyā sundarīnandā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, where’s Venerable Sundarīnandā?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vutte, sundarīnandāya bhikkhuniyā antevāsinī bhikkhunī sāḷhaṁ migāranattāraṁ etadavoca—“gilānāvuso; piṇḍapātaṁ nīharissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun who was Sundarīnandā’s pupil told him: “She’s sick. I’m bringing her almsfood.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāḷho migāranattā—“yampāhaṁ atthāya bhikkhunisaṅghassa bhattaṁ akāsiṁ ayyāya sundarīnandāya kāraṇā”ti manusse āṇāpetvā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāḷha thought, “I invited the Sangha of nuns because of Sundarīnandā,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ bhattena parivisathā”ti vatvā yena bhikkhunupassayo tenupasaṅkami.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and after telling the people there to serve the meal to the Sangha of nuns, he left for the nuns’ dwelling place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sundarīnandā bhikkhunī bahārāmakoṭṭhake ṭhitā hoti sāḷhaṁ migāranattāraṁ patimānentī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then Sundarīnandā was standing outside the monastery gateway longing for Sāḷha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho sundarīnandā bhikkhunī sāḷhaṁ migāranattāraṁ dūratova āgacchantaṁ. Disvāna upassayaṁ pavisitvā sasīsaṁ pārupitvā mañcake nipajji.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she saw him coming, she entered the dwelling, put on her upper robe so that it covered her head, and lay down on her bed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāḷho migāranattā yena sundarīnandā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā sundarīnandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—“kiṁ te, ayye, aphāsu, kissa nipannāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāḷha approached her and said, “Venerable, what’s wrong with you? Why are you lying down?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañhetaṁ, āvuso, hoti yā anicchantaṁ icchatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s what happens when you desire someone who doesn’t desire you in return.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kyāhaṁ taṁ, ayye, na icchissāmi?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you mean I don’t desire you? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api cāhaṁ okāsaṁ na labhāmi taṁ dūsetun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I just couldn’t find an opportunity to be intimate with you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassuto avassutāya sundarīnandāya bhikkhuniyā kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajji.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And both having lust, he made physical contact with Sundarīnandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī jarādubbalā caraṇagilānā sundarīnandāya bhikkhuniyā avidūre nipannā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then a nun who was weak from old age and had problems with her feet was lying down not far from Sundarīnandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho sā bhikkhunī sāḷhaṁ migāranattāraṁ avassutaṁ avassutāya sundarīnandāya bhikkhuniyā kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajjantaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She saw how Sāḷha made physical contact with Sundarīnandā while both of them had lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—“kathañhi nāma ayyā sundarīnandā avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She complained and criticized her, “How could Venerable Sundarīnandā consent to a man making physical contact with her, when they both had lust?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun then told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā santuṭṭhā lajjiniyo kukkuccikā sikkhākāmā tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires, who had a sense of conscience, and who were contented, afraid of wrongdoing, and fond of the training, complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā sundarīnandā avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Sundarīnandā consent to a man making physical contact with her, when they both had lust?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ. Ye te bhikkhū appicchā santuṭṭhā lajjino kukkuccakā sikkhākāmā te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—“kathañhi nāma sundarīnandā bhikkhunī avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those nuns then told the monks. And the monks of few desires, who had a sense of conscience, and who were contented, afraid of wrongdoing, and fond of the training, criticized her in the same way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū sundarīnandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After criticizing the nun Sundarīnandā in many ways, they told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā bhikkhū paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, sundarīnandā bhikkhunī avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Sundarīnandā acted like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ananucchavikaṁ, bhikkhave, sundarīnandāya bhikkhuniyā ananulomikaṁ appatirūpaṁ assāmaṇakaṁ akappiyaṁ akaraṇīyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s not suitable, monks, it’s not proper for the nun Sundarīnandā, it’s not worthy of a monastic, it’s not allowable, it’s not to be done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, sundarīnandā bhikkhunī avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could Sundarīnandā consent to a man making physical contact with her, when they both had lust? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya pasannānaṁ vā bhiyyobhāvāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha khvetaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānañceva appasādāya pasannānañca ekaccānaṁ aññathattāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and cause some to lose it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sundarīnandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā dubbharatāya dupposatāya mahicchatāya asantuṭṭhitāya saṅgaṇikāya kosajjassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsitvā, anekapariyāyena subharatāya suposatāya appicchassa santuṭṭhassa sallekhassa dhutassa pāsādikassa apacayassa vīriyārambhassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsitvā, bhikkhūnaṁ tadanucchavikaṁ tadanulomikaṁ dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the Buddha spoke in many ways in dispraise of being difficult to support and maintain, in dispraise of great desires, discontent, socializing, and laziness; but he spoke in many ways in praise of being easy to support and maintain, of fewness of wishes, contentment, self-elimination, ascetic practices, serenity, reduction in things, and being energetic. After giving a teaching on what is right and proper, he addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tena hi, bhikkhave, bhikkhunīnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññapessāmi dasa atthavase paṭicca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, monks, I will lay down a training rule for the following ten reasons: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghasuṭṭhutāya, saṅghaphāsutāya, dummaṅkūnaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ niggahāya, pesalānaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ phāsuvihārāya, diṭṭhadhammikānaṁ āsavānaṁ saṁvarāya, samparāyikānaṁ āsavānaṁ paṭighātāya, appasannānaṁ pasādāya, pasannānaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya, saddhammaṭṭhitiyā vinayānuggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the well-being of the Sangha, for the comfort of the Sangha, for the restraint of bad nuns, for the ease of good nuns, for the restraint of corruptions relating to the present life, for the restraint of corruptions relating to future lives, to give rise to confidence in those without it, to increase the confidence of those who have it, for the longevity of the true Teaching, and for supporting the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ āmasanaṁ vā parāmasanaṁ vā gahaṇaṁ vā chupanaṁ vā paṭipīḷanaṁ vā sādiyeyya, ayampi pārājikā hoti asaṁvāsā ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalikā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a lustful nun consents to a lustful man making physical contact with her, to touching her, to taking hold of her, to contacting her, or to squeezing her, anywhere below the collar bone but above the knees, she too is expelled and excluded from the community. The training rule on above the knees.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā yathāyuttā yathājaccā yathānāmā yathāgottā yathāsīlā yathāvihārinī yathāgocarā therā vā navā vā majjhimā vā, esā vuccati yā panāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever, of such a kind, of such activity, of such caste, of such name, of such family, of such conduct, of such behavior, of such association, who is senior, who is junior, or who is of middle standing—this is called “a”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhikāti bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is a nun because she lives on alms; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhācariyaṁ ajjhupagatāti bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun because she has gone over to living on alms; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhinnapaṭadharāti bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun because she wears a patchwork cloth; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaññāya bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun by convention; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭiññāya bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun on account of her claim; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ehi bhikkhunīti bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a “come, nun” nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tīhi saraṇagamanehi upasampannāti bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun given the full ordination by taking the three refuges; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhadrā bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a good nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārā bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun of substance; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sekhā bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a trainee nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asekhā bhikkhunī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a fully trained nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggena ubhatosaṅghena ñatticatutthena kammena akuppena ṭhānārahena upasampannāti bhikkhunī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra yāyaṁ bhikkhunī samaggena ubhatosaṅghena ñatticatutthena kammena akuppena ṭhānārahena upasampannā, ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassutā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lustful: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārattā apekkhavatī paṭibaddhacittā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having lust, longing for, in love with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassuto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lustful: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāratto apekkhavā paṭibaddhacitto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having lust, longing for, in love with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purisapuggalo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Man: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussapuriso na yakkho na peto na tiracchānagato viññū paṭibalo kāyasaṁsaggaṁ samāpajjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human male, not a male spirit, not a male ghost, not a male animal. He understands and is capable of making physical contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhakkhakanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Below the collar bone: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">heṭṭhakkhakaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">down from the collar bone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Above the knees: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uparijāṇumaṇḍalaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">up from the knees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmasanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Making physical contact: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmaṭṭhamattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">making mere physical contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parāmasanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Touching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itocito ca sañcopanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">touching here and there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahaṇaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking hold of: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gahitamattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the mere taking hold of. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chupanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Contacting: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phuṭṭhamattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">mere contacting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭipīḷanaṁ vā sādiyeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Consents to squeezing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅgaṁ gahetvā nippīḷanaṁ sādiyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">consents to the taking hold of a bodily part and then pressing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">She too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimāyo upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offenses entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikā hotīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is expelled: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi nāma puriso sīsacchinno abhabbo tena sarīrabandhanena jīvituṁ; evameva bhikkhunī avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ āmasanaṁ vā parāmasanaṁ vā gahaṇaṁ vā chupanaṁ vā paṭipīḷanaṁ vā sādiyantī assamaṇī hoti asakyadhītā. Tena vuccati pārājikā hotīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">just as a man with his head cut off is unable to continue living by reconnecting it to the body, so is a lustful nun who consents to a lustful man making physical contact with her, to touching her, to taking hold of her, to contacting her, or to squeezing her, anywhere below the collar bone but above the knees, not a monastic, not a daughter of the Sakyan. Therefore it is said “she is expelled”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṁvāsāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Excluded from the community: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṁvāso nāma ekakammaṁ ekuddeso samasikkhatā— eso saṁvāso nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Community: joint legal procedures, a joint recitation, the same training—this is called “community”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tāya saddhiṁ natthi, tena vuccati asaṁvāsāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She does not take part in this—therefore it is called “excluded from the community”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhatoavassute adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti pārājikassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If both have lust and either of them makes physical contact, below the collar bone but above the knees, body to body, she commits an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with their own body, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something connected to their own body, makes physical contact with the other’s body, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something connected to their own body, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with something released by the other, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhakkhakaṁ adhojāṇumaṇḍalaṁ kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them makes physical contact, above the collar bone or below the knees, body to body, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with their own body, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something connected to their own body, makes physical contact with the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something connected to their own body, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with something released by the other, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoavassute adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If only the nun has lust and either of them makes physical contact, below the collar bone but above the knees, body to body, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with their own body, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something connected to their own body, makes physical contact with the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something connected to their own body, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with something released by the other, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhakkhakaṁ adhojāṇumaṇḍalaṁ kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them makes physical contact, above the collar bone or below the knees, body to body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with their own body, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something connected to their own body, makes physical contact with the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something connected to their own body, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with something connected to the other’s body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If either of them, with something released by them, makes physical contact with something released by the other, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhatoavassute yakkhassa vā petassa vā paṇḍakassa vā tiracchānagatamanussaviggahassa vā adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If both have lust and she makes physical contact with a spirit, a ghost, a _paṇḍaka_, or an animal in human form, below the collar bone but above the knees, body to body, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with her own body, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something connected to her own body, makes physical contact with their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something connected to her own body, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with something released by them, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhakkhakaṁ adhojāṇumaṇḍalaṁ kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she makes physical contact with them, above the collar bone or below the knees, body to body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with her own body, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something connected to her own body, makes physical contact with their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something connected to her own body, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with something released by them, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoavassute adhakkhakaṁ ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If only the nun has lust and she makes physical contact with them, below the collar bone but above the knees, body to body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with her own body, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something connected to her own body, makes physical contact with their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something connected to her own body, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with something released by them, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhakkhakaṁ adhojāṇumaṇḍalaṁ kāyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she makes physical contact with them, above the collar bone or below the knees, body to body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with her own body, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something connected to her own body, makes physical contact with their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyapaṭibaddhena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something connected to her own body, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena kāyapaṭibaddhaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with something connected to their body, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyena nissaggiyaṁ āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she, with something released by her, makes physical contact with something released by them, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asādiyantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not consent; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khittacittāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is deranged; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāṭṭāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is overwhelmed by pain; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamapārājikaṁ samattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth offense entailing expulsion is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
