<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pārājikakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing expulsion </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pj6_root-pli-ms.j. Pārājikakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing expulsion </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">6. Vajjappaṭicchādikāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">6. The training rule on those who conceal offenses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sundarīnandā bhikkhunī sāḷhena migāranattunā gabbhinī hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Sundarīnandā was pregnant by Migāra’s grandson Sāḷha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva gabbho taruṇo ahosi tāva chādesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the fetus got large, she concealed her condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripakke gabbhe vibbhamitvā vijāyi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And when the fetus was fully grown, she disrobed and gave birth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns said to the nun Thullanandā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sundarīnandā kho, ayye, aciravibbhantā vijātā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, Sundarīnandā gave birth shortly after disrobing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci no sā bhikkhunīyeva samānā gabbhinī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Could it be that she was pregnant while she was still a nun?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ, ayye”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Venerables.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kissa pana tvaṁ, ayye, jānaṁ pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannaṁ bhikkhuniṁ nevattanā paṭicodesi na gaṇassa ārocesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But, Venerable, when you knew that a nun had committed an offense entailing expulsion, why didn’t you either confront her yourself or tell a group of nuns?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo etissā avaṇṇo mayheso avaṇṇo, yā etissā akitti mayhesā akitti, yo etissā ayaso mayheso ayaso, yo etissā alābho mayheso alābho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Her disrepute is my disrepute, her infamy is my infamy, her notoriety is my notoriety, her loss is my loss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kyāhaṁ, ayye, attano avaṇṇaṁ attano akittiṁ attano ayasaṁ attano alābhaṁ paresaṁ ārocessāmī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Why would I tell others of my own disrepute, infamy, notoriety, and loss?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā jānaṁ pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannaṁ bhikkhuniṁ nevattanā paṭicodessati na gaṇassa ārocessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā, knowing that a nun had committed an offense entailing expulsion, neither confront her herself nor tell a group of nuns?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those nuns told the monks what had happened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā bhikkhū paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī jānaṁ pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannaṁ bhikkhuniṁ nevattanā paṭicodeti na gaṇassa ārocetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā acted like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī jānaṁ pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannaṁ bhikkhuniṁ nevattanā paṭicodessati na gaṇassa ārocessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā, knowing that a nun had committed an offense entailing expulsion, neither confront her herself nor tell a group of nuns? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī jānaṁ pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannaṁ bhikkhuniṁ nevattanā paṭicodeyya na gaṇassa āroceyya, yadā ca sā ṭhitā vā assa cutā vā nāsitā vā avassaṭā vā, sā pacchā evaṁ vadeyya—‘pubbevāhaṁ, ayye, aññāsiṁ etaṁ bhikkhuniṁ evarūpā ca evarūpā ca sā bhaginīti, no ca kho attanā paṭicodessaṁ na gaṇassa ārocessan’ti, ayampi pārājikā hoti asaṁvāsā vajjappaṭicchādikā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun knows that a nun has committed an offense entailing expulsion, but she neither confronts her herself nor tells a group of nuns, and afterward—whether that nun remains or has died or has been expelled or has converted—she says, “Venerables, although I previously knew that this nun was like this, I thought, ‘I will neither confront her myself nor tell a group of nuns,’” she too is expelled and excluded from the community. The training rule on those who conceal offenses.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti, aññe vā tassā ārocenti, sā vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she knows by herself or others have told her or she has told her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has committed an offense entailing expulsion: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhannaṁ pārājikānaṁ aññataraṁ pārājikaṁ ajjhāpannaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has committed any one of the eight offenses entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nevattanā paṭicodeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">She neither confronts her herself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sayaṁ codeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not herself accuse her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na gaṇassa āroceyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor tells a group of nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññāsaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ āroceyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not tell other nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā ca sā ṭhitā vā assa cutā vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether that nun remains or has died: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhitā nāma saliṅge ṭhitā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Remains: what is meant is that she remains as a nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cutā nāma kālaṅkatā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has died: what is meant is that she has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāsitā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has been expelled: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ vā vibbhantā hoti aññehi vā nāsitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has either disrobed herself or been expelled by others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassaṭā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has converted: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">titthāyatanaṁ saṅkantā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what is meant is that she has joined another religious community. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā pacchā evaṁ vadeyya— “pubbevāhaṁ, ayye, aññāsiṁ etaṁ bhikkhuniṁ evarūpā ca evarūpā ca sā bhaginī”ti. No ca kho attanā paṭicodessanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Afterward she says, “Venerables, although I previously knew that this nun was like this, I thought, ‘I will neither confront her myself’”: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ vā na codessaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I won’t accuse her myself.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na gaṇassa ārocessanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nor tell a group of nuns”: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññāsaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ ārocessaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nor tell other nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">She too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimāyo upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offenses entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikā hotīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is expelled: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi nāma paṇḍupalāso bandhanā pamutto abhabbo haritatthāya, evameva bhikkhunī jānaṁ pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannaṁ bhikkhuniṁ nevattanā paṭicodessāmi na gaṇassa ārocessāmīti dhuraṁ nikkhittamatte assamaṇī hoti asakyadhītā. Tena vuccati pārājikā hotīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">just as a fallen, withered leaf is incapable of becoming green again, so is a nun who knows that a nun has committed an offense entailing expulsion, but who thinks, “I will neither confront her myself nor tell a group of nuns,” by the mere fact of giving up her duty, not a monastic, not a daughter of the Sakyan. Therefore it is said “she is expelled”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṁvāsāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Excluded from the community: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṁvāso nāma ekakammaṁ ekuddeso samasikkhatā. Eso saṁvāso nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Community: joint legal procedures, a joint recitation, the same training—this is called “community”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tāya saddhiṁ natthi. Tena vuccati asaṁvāsāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She does not take part in this—therefore it is called “excluded from the community”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅghassa bhaṇḍanaṁ vā kalaho vā viggaho vā vivādo vā bhavissatī”ti nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not tell because she thinks there will be quarrels or disputes in the Sangha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅghabhedo vā saṅgharāji vā bhavissatī”ti nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not tell because she thinks there will be a schism or fracture in the Sangha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ kakkhaḷā pharusā jīvitantarāyaṁ vā brahmacariyantarāyaṁ vā karissatī”ti nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not tell because she thinks the person she is telling about is cruel and harsh and that she might become a danger to life or to the living of the spiritual life; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññā patirūpā bhikkhuniyo apassantī nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not tell because she does not see any suitable nuns; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nacchādetukāmā nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not tell, but not because she wants to conceal; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāyissati sakena kammenāti nāroceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not tell because she thinks the other person will be known through her own actions; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"/></p>
<p class="p3">if she is deranged; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"/></p>
<p class="p3">if she is overwhelmed by pain; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyapārājikaṁ samattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth offense entailing expulsion is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
