<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-ss2_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2. Corīvuṭṭhāpikāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">2. The training rule on one who gives the full admission to a criminal </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena vesāliyaṁ aññatarassa licchavissa pajāpati aticārinī hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time in Vesālī the wife of a certain Licchavī man was unfaithful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so licchavi taṁ itthiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu viramāhi, anatthaṁ kho te karissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please stop. If you don’t, I’ll punish you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi vuccamānā nādiyi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But she did not listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena vesāliyaṁ licchavigaṇo sannipatito hoti kenacideva karaṇīyena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then in Vesālī the Licchavī clan had gathered on some business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so licchavi te licchavayo etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That Licchavī man said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ekaṁ me, ayyo, itthiṁ anujānāthā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sirs, please give me permission in regard to one of my wives.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kā nāma sā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is it with her?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayhaṁ pajāpati aticarati, taṁ ghātessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“She’s unfaithful. I wish to kill her.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jānāhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You may go ahead.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho sā itthī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When his wife heard </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sāmiko kira maṁ ghātetukāmo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that her husband wanted to kill her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Varabhaṇḍaṁ ādāya sāvatthiṁ gantvā titthiye upasaṅkamitvā pabbajjaṁ yāci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she took their most valuable possessions and went to Sāvatthī. There she went to the monastics of other religions and asked for the going forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Titthiyā na icchiṁsu pabbājetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but they refused. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo upasaṅkamitvā pabbajjaṁ yāci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She then went to the Buddhist nuns and again asked for the going forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyopi na icchiṁsu pabbājetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but they too refused. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ upasaṅkamitvā bhaṇḍakaṁ dassetvā pabbajjaṁ yāci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She then went to the nun Thullanandā, showed her the goods, and once again asked for the going forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī bhaṇḍakaṁ gahetvā pabbājesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā took the goods and gave her the going forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so licchavi taṁ itthiṁ gavesanto sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhunīsu pabbajitaṁ disvāna yena rājā pasenadi kosalo tenupasaṅkami;</span></p>
<p class="p3">That Licchavī man then went to Sāvatthī in search of his wife. When he saw that she had been given the going forth as a nun, he went to King Pasenadi of Kosala </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā rājānaṁ pasenadiṁ kosalaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pajāpati me, deva, varabhaṇḍaṁ ādāya sāvatthiṁ anuppattā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, my wife took my most valuable possessions and came to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ devo anujānātū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please permit me to deal with her.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhaṇe, vicinitvā ācikkhā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, find her and then inform me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Diṭṭhā, deva, bhikkhunīsu pabbajitā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen her. She’s gone forth as a nun.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace, bhaṇe, bhikkhunīsu pabbajitā, na sā labbhā kiñci kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If she’s gone forth as a nun, there’s nothing that can be done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, caratu brahmacariyaṁ sammā dukkhassa antakiriyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Teaching of the Buddha is well-proclaimed. Let her practice the spiritual life for the full ending of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so licchavi ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that Licchavī man complained and criticized the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo coriṁ pabbājessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns give the going forth to a criminal?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tassa licchavissa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of that Licchavī man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā coriṁ pabbājessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā give the going forth to a criminal?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns told the monks. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī coriṁ pabbājetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī coriṁ pabbājessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā give the going forth to a criminal? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī jānaṁ coriṁ vajjhaṁ viditaṁ anapaloketvā rājānaṁ vā saṅghaṁ vā gaṇaṁ vā pūgaṁ vā seṇiṁ vā aññatra kappā vuṭṭhāpeyya, ayampi bhikkhunī paṭhamāpattikaṁ dhammaṁ āpannā nissāraṇīyaṁ saṅghādisesan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun, without getting permission from the king or the Sangha or a community or an association or a society, gives the full admission to a woman who she knows is a criminal and who is known as sentenced to death, then, except when it is allowable, that nun too has committed an immediate offense entailing sending away and suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">She knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti aññe vā tassā ārocenti, sā vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she knows by herself or others have told her or she has told her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Corī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman who is a criminal: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā pañcamāsakaṁ vā atirekapañcamāsakaṁ vā agghanakaṁ adinnaṁ theyyasaṅkhātaṁ ādiyati, esā corī nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any woman who has stolen anything worth five _māsakas_ coins or more is called “a criminal”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vajjhā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentenced to death: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ katvā vajjhappattā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been sentenced to death because of her action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viditā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is known: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññehi manussehi ñātā hoti “vajjhā esā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is known to other people that she has been sentenced to death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anapaloketvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without getting permission from: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāpucchā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">without having asked permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The king: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha rājā anusāsati, rājā apaloketabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where a king reigns, permission should be gotten from the king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunisaṅgho vuccati, bhikkhunisaṅgho apaloketabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what is meant is the Sangha of nuns, and permission should be gotten from that Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A community: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha gaṇo anusāsati, gaṇo apaloketabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where a community governs, permission should be gotten from that community. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pūgo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An association: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha pūgo anusāsati, pūgo apaloketabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where an association governs, permission should be gotten from that association. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seṇi nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A society: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha seṇi anusāsati, seṇi apaloketabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where a society governs, permission should be gotten from that society. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra kappāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except when it is allowable: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā kappaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless it is allowable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kappaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Allowable: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve kappāni— titthiyesu vā pabbajitā hoti aññāsu vā bhikkhunīsu pabbajitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two allowable situations: she has gone forth with monastics of another religion or she has gone forth with other Buddhist nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra kappā “vuṭṭhāpessāmī”ti gaṇaṁ vā ācariniṁ vā pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā pariyesati, sīmaṁ vā sammannati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, intending to give the full admission, she searches for a group, a teacher, a bowl, or a robe, or she establishes a monastic boundary, then, except when it is allowable, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne upajjhāyāya āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, the preceptor commits an offense entailing suspension, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇassa ca ācariniyā ca āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the group and the teacher commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">That too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimaṁ upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamāpattikanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">An immediate offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saha vatthujjhācārā āpajjati asamanubhāsanāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is an offense as soon as the misconduct is committed, and no pressing is required. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissāraṇīyanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing sending away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghamhā nissārīyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is sent away from the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati saṅghādisesoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Coriyā corisaññā aññatra kappā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is a criminal, and the nun perceives her as such, and she gives her the full admission, except when it is allowable, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Coriyā vematikā aññatra kappā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is a criminal, but the nun is unsure of it, and she gives her the full admission, except when it is allowable, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Coriyā acorisaññā aññatra kappā vuṭṭhāpeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is a criminal, but the nun does not perceive her as such, and she gives her the full admission, except when it is allowable, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acoriyā corisaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not a criminal, but the nun perceives her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acoriyā vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not a criminal, but the nun is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acoriyā acorisaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not a criminal, and the nun does not perceive her as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantī vuṭṭhāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives her the full admission without knowing that she is a criminal; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apaloketvā vuṭṭhāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives her the full admission after getting permission; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kappakataṁ vuṭṭhāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives her the full admission when it is allowable; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasaṅghādisesasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second offense entailing suspension is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
