<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-ss11_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">11. Adhikaraṇakupitasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">11. The training rule on being angry about a legal issue </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Caṇḍakāḷī was angry that a legal issue had been decided against her, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo, dosagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo, mohagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo, bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The nuns are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā caṇḍakāḷī kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ vakkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Caṇḍakāḷī say such things just because she is angry that a legal issue has been decided against her?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo …pe… bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo’”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Caṇḍakāḷī said this because she was angry?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo …pe… bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ vakkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Caṇḍakāḷī say such things just because she is angry that a legal issue has been decided against her? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo …pe… bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun is angry because a legal issue has been decided against her, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo, dosagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo, mohagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo, bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo’ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The nuns are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi evamassa vacanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">then the nuns should correct her like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘māyye, kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ avaca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, just because you’re angry that a legal issue has been decided against you, don’t say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo dosagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo mohagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The nuns are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyā kho chandāpi gaccheyya, dosāpi gaccheyya, mohāpi gaccheyya, bhayāpi gaccheyyā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Perhaps it’s you who are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi vuccamānā tatheva paggaṇheyya, sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsitabbā tassa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that nun continues as before, the nuns should press her up to three times to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyañce samanubhāsīyamānā taṁ paṭinissajjeyya, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she then stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjeyya, ayampi bhikkhunī yāvatatiyakaṁ dhammaṁ āpannā nissāraṇīyaṁ saṅghādisesan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, then after the third announcement that nun too has committed an offense entailing sending away and suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kismiñcideva adhikaraṇeti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhikaraṇaṁ nāma cattāri adhikaraṇāni— vivādādhikaraṇaṁ, anuvādādhikaraṇaṁ, āpattādhikaraṇaṁ, kiccādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of legal issues: legal issues arising from disputes, legal issues arising from accusations, legal issues arising from offenses, legal issues arising from business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paccākatā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has been decided against her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parājitā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what is meant is that she has lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kupitā anattamanāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Angry: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anabhiraddhā āhatacittā khilajātā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">discontent, having hatred, hostile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vadeyyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo …pe… bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The nuns are acting out of favoritism … and fear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā sā evaṁvādinī bhikkhunī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that nun who speaks thus. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāhi bhikkhunīhi. Yā passanti yā suṇanti tāhi vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other nuns who see it or hear about it. They should correct her like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyye, kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ avaca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, just because you’re angry that a legal issue has been decided against you, don’t say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo …pe… bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The nuns are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyā kho chandāpi gaccheyya …pe… bhayāpi gaccheyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Perhaps it’s you who are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct her a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvā na vadanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If those who heard about it do not say anything, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī saṅghamajjhampi ākaḍḍhitvā vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun, even if she has to be pulled into the Sangha, should be corrected like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyye, kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ avaca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, just because you’re angry that a legal issue has been decided against you, don’t say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo …pe… bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The nuns are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyā kho chandāpi gaccheyya …pe… bhayāpi gaccheyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Perhaps it’s you who are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They should correct her a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should press her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, she should be pressed like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable nun should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho. Ayaṁ itthannāmā bhikkhunī kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. The nun so-and-so, because she is angry that a legal issue has been decided against her, says this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo… pe… bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The nuns are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she keeps on saying it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuniṁ samanubhāseyya tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should press her to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā bhikkhunī kismiñcideva adhikaraṇe paccākatā kupitā anattamanā evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun so-and-so, because she is angry that a legal issue has been decided against her, says this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“chandagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo …pe… bhayagāminiyo ca bhikkhuniyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The nuns are acting out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, and fear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she keeps on saying it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuniṁ samanubhāsati tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha presses her to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassā ayyāya khamati itthannāmāya bhikkhuniyā samanubhāsanā tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya, sā tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who approves of pressing her to make her stop should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā nakkhamati, sā bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the second time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the third time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanubhaṭṭhā saṅghena itthannāmā bhikkhunī tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has pressed nun so-and-so to stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesaṁ ajjhāpajjantiyā ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For one who commits the offense entailing suspension, the offense of wrong conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā paṭippassambhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the serious offenses are annulled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">That too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimāyo upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyakanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the third announcement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsanāya āpajjati, na saha vatthujjhācārā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is an offense when she has been pressed for the third time, not as soon as the misconduct has been committed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissāraṇīyanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing sending away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghamhā nissārīyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is sent away from the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati saṅghādisesoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematikā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as illegitimate, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as legitimate, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññā āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asamanubhāsantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has not been pressed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭinissajjantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she stops; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasaṅghādisesasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eleventh offense entailing suspension is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
