<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-ss12_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">12. Pāpasamācārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">12. The training rule on bad behavior </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā antevāsikā bhikkhuniyo saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nuns who were the pupils of the nun Thullanandā were socializing and behaving badly, had a bad reputation, and were harassing the Sangha of nuns and hiding each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo saṁsaṭṭhā viharissanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns behave in this way?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns are behaving like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo saṁsaṭṭhā viharissanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns behave in this way? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhuniyo paneva saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If nuns socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhunīhi evamassu vacanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">then the nuns should correct them like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sisters, you socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Be secluded, Venerables. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhunīhi vuccamānā tatheva paggaṇheyyuṁ, tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhunīhi yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsitabbā tassa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If those nuns still continue as before, the nuns should press them up to three times to make them stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyañce samanubhāsīyamānā taṁ paṭinissajjeyyuṁ, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they then stop, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjeyyuṁ, imāpi bhikkhuniyo yāvatatiyakaṁ dhammaṁ āpannā nissāraṇīyaṁ saṅghādisesan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they do not stop, then after the third announcement those nuns too have committed an offense entailing sending away and suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo panevāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannāyo vuccanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what is meant is that they are fully ordained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁsaṭṭhā viharantīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Socialize: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṁsaṭṭhā nāma ananulomikena kāyikavācasikena saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they socialize with improper bodily and verbal action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāpācārāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Behave badly: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpakena ācārena samannāgatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having bad behavior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāpasaddāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Have a bad reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpakena kittisaddena abbhuggatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a bad reputation has spread about them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāpasilokāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Are notorious: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpakena micchājīvena jīvitaṁ kappenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they make a living by means of a bad and wrong livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Harass the Sangha of nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññissā kamme karīyamāne paṭikkosanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they object on each other’s behalf when a legal procedure is being carried out against them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Hide each other’s offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññaṁ vajjaṁ paṭicchādenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they hide one another’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā bhikkhuniyoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā tā saṁsaṭṭhā bhikkhuniyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">those nuns who socialize. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāhi bhikkhunīhi. Yā passanti yā suṇanti tāhi vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other nuns who see it or hear about it. They should correct them like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sisters, you socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Be secluded, Venerables. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct them a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjanti, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they stop, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they do not stop, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvā na vadanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If those who heard about it do not say anything, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā bhikkhuniyo saṅghamajjhampi ākaḍḍhitvā vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those nuns, even if they have to be pulled into the Sangha, should be corrected like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sisters, you socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Be secluded, Venerables. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They should correct them a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjanti, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they stop, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they do not stop, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā bhikkhuniyo samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should press them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, they should be pressed like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable nun should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthannāmā ca itthannāmā ca bhikkhuniyo saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns so-and-so and so-and-so socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they keep on doing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmañca itthannāmañca bhikkhuniyo samanubhāseyya tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should press them to make them stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthannāmā ca itthannāmā ca bhikkhuniyo saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns so-and-so and so-and-so socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they keep on doing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmañca itthannāmañca bhikkhuniyo samanubhāsati tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha presses them to make them stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassā ayyāya khamati itthannāmāya ca itthannāmāya ca bhikkhunīnaṁ samanubhāsanā tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya, sā tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who approves of pressing them to make them stop should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā nakkhamati, sā bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the second time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the third time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanubhaṭṭhā saṅghena, itthannāmā ca itthannāmā ca bhikkhuniyo tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has pressed the nuns so-and-so and so-and-so to stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, they commit a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, they commit an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesaṁ ajjhāpajjantīnaṁ ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā paṭippassambhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they commit the offense entailing suspension, the offense of wrong conduct and the serious offenses are annulled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve tisso ekato samanubhāsitabbā. Tatuttari na samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two or three may be pressed together, but not more than that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāpi bhikkhuniyoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those nuns too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimāyo upādāya vuccanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyakanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the third announcement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsanāya āpajjanti, na saha vatthujjhācārā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is an offense when they have been pressed for the third time, not as soon as the misconduct has been committed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissāraṇīyanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing sending away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghamhā nissārīyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is sent away from the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati saṅghādisesoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjanti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and they perceive it as such, and they do not stop, they commit an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematikā na paṭinissajjanti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but they are unsure of it, and they do not stop, they commit an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjanti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but they perceive it as illegitimate, and they do not stop, they commit an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but they perceive it as legitimate, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but they are unsure of it, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and they perceive it as such, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asamanubhāsantīnaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has not been pressed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭinissajjantīnaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she stops; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikānanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamasaṅghādisesasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The twelfth offense entailing suspension is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
