<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-np4_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">4. Aññaviññāpanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">4. The training rule on asking for something else </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī gilānā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nun Thullanandā was sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro upāsako yena thullanandā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lay follower went to her and asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ te, ayye, aphāsu, kiṁ āharīyatū”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, what’s wrong with you? What may I get you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sappinā me, āvuso, attho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I need ghee.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so upāsako aññatarassa āpaṇikassa gharā kahāpaṇassa sappiṁ āharitvā thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That lay follower then brought back from a shop a _kahāpaṇa_’s worth of ghee and gave it to Thullanandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na me, āvuso, sappinā attho;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t need ghee; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">telena me attho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I need oil.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so upāsako yena so āpaṇiko tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ āpaṇikaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The lay follower returned to the shopkeeper and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kirāyyo, ayyāya sappinā attho, telena attho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It seems the nun doesn’t need ghee, but oil. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handa te sappiṁ, telaṁ me dehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Here’s your ghee; please give me oil.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace mayaṁ, ayyo, vikkītaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ puna ādiyissāma, kadā amhākaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ vikkāyissati;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, if we were to take back goods that have been sold, when would our goods be sold? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappissa kayena sappi haṭaṁ, telassa kayaṁ āhara, telaṁ harissasī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When ghee is bought, ghee is taken away. Buying oil, you receive that, and you’ll take that away.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so upāsako ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That lay follower then complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā aññaṁ viññāpetvā aññaṁ viññāpessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā ask for one thing and then for something else?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tassa upāsakassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of that lay follower, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those nuns then told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī aññaṁ viññāpetvā aññaṁ viññāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī aññaṁ viññāpetvā aññaṁ viññāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā ask for one thing and then for something else? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī aññaṁ viññāpetvā aññaṁ viññāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun asks for one thing and then for something else, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ viññāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Asks for one thing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci viññāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever she asks for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ viññāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then for something else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṁ ṭhapetvā aññaṁ viññāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from that thing, if she asks for something else, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she gets it, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā ekabhikkhuniyā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is to be relinquished to the Sangha of nuns, a group, or an individual nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it’s to be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in Nuns’ Relinquishment 1, [](pli-tv-bi-vb-np1:2.1.21--2.1.43), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, ayye, aññaṁ viññāpetvā aññaṁ viññāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ, imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘Venerables, this thing, which I asked for after asking for something else, is to be relinquished. I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyun”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayyāya dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññe aññasaññā aññaṁ viññāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is something else and she perceives it as such, and she asks for that, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññe vematikā aññaṁ viññāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is something else, but she is unsure of it, and she asks for that, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññe anaññasaññā aññaṁ viññāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is something else, but she does not perceives it as such, and she asks for that, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññe aññasaññā anaññaṁ viññāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not something else, but she perceives it as such, and she asks for that, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññe vematikā anaññaṁ viññāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not something else, but she is unsure of it, and she asks for that, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññe anaññasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not something else, and she does not perceives it as such, and she asks for that, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taññeva viññāpeti, aññañca viññāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asks for both at the same time; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ānisaṁsaṁ dassetvā viññāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she demonstrates a benefit and then asks; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
