<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-np10_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">10. Puggalikacetāpanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">10. The training rule on exchanging what belongs to an individual </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī bahussutā hoti bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā was a learned reciter, and she was confident and skilled at giving teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahū manussā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ payirupāsanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Many people visited her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā pariveṇaṁ undriyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the precincts of Thullanandā’s dwelling were falling apart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People asked her why, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissidaṁ te, ayye, pariveṇaṁ undriyatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthāvuso, dāyakā, natthi kārakā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and she replied, “I have neither a donor, nor a worker.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te manussā thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā pariveṇatthāya chandakaṁ saṅgharitvā thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā parikkhāraṁ adaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after collecting voluntary contributions for the precincts of Thullanandā’s dwelling, the people gave the collected requisites to Thullanandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī tena ca parikkhārena sayampi yācitvā bhesajjaṁ cetāpetvā paribhuñji.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But even though she had asked for them, Thullanandā exchanged those requisites for tonics, which she then used. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā jānitvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the people found out about this, they complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā aññadatthikena parikkhārena aññuddisikena puggalikena saññācikena aññaṁ cetāpessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When personal requisites are designated for a specific purpose and were asked for, how could the nun Thullanandā exchange them for something else?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī aññadatthikena parikkhārena aññuddisikena puggalikena saññācikena aññaṁ cetāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī aññadatthikena parikkhārena aññuddisikena puggalikena saññācikena aññaṁ cetāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When personal requisites are designated for a specific purpose and were asked for, how could the nun Thullanandā exchange them for something else? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī aññadatthikena parikkhārena aññuddisikena puggalikena saññācikena aññaṁ cetāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When a personal requisite is designated for a specific purpose and was asked for, if a nun exchanges it for something else, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun : </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññadatthikena parikkhārena aññuddisikenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A requisite is designated for a specific purpose: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya dinnena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it was given for a specific purpose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalikenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Personal: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekāya bhikkhuniyā, na saṅghassa, na gaṇassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">belonging to an individual nun, not to the Sangha, not to a group. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññācikenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Was asked for: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ yācitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that she herself had asked for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ cetāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Exchanges it for something else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁatthāya dinnaṁ taṁ ṭhapetvā aññaṁ cetāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, apart from the purpose for which it was given, she exchanges it for something else, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she gets it, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā ekabhikkhuniyā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is to be relinquished to the Sangha of nuns, a group, or an individual nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it’s to be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in Nuns’ Relinquishment 1, [](pli-tv-bi-vb-np1:2.1.21--2.1.43), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, ayye, aññadatthikena parikkhārena aññuddisikena puggalikena saññācikena aññaṁ cetāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ, imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this thing, which I got in exchange for a personal requisite that was designated for a specific purpose and had been asked for, is to be relinquished. I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyun”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayyāya dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññadatthike aññadatthikasaññā aññaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is for a specific purpose and she perceives that it is, and she exchanges it for something else, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññadatthike vematikā aññaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is for a specific purpose, but she is unsure of it, and she exchanges it for something else, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññadatthike anaññadatthikasaññā aññaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is for a specific purpose, but she does not perceive that it is, and she exchanges it for something else, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṭṭhaṁ paṭilabhitvā yathādāne upanetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she receives in return what had been relinquished, it is to be used in accordance with the intention of the donors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññadatthike aññadatthikasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not for a specific purpose, but she perceives that it is, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññadatthike vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not for a specific purpose, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññadatthike anaññadatthikasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not for a specific purpose, and she does not perceive that it is, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sesakaṁ upaneti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she uses the remainder; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmike apaloketvā upaneti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she uses it after getting permission from the owners; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tenth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
