<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-np3_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">3. Cīvaraparivattanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">3. The training rule on swapping robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī aññatarāya bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ cīvaraṁ parivattetvā paribhuñji.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā was using a robe she had received after swapping with another nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī taṁ cīvaraṁ saṅgharitvā nikkhipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the other nun folded up the robe she had received and put it aside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī taṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā then said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yaṁ te, ayye, mayā saddhiṁ cīvaraṁ parivattitaṁ, kahaṁ taṁ cīvaran”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, where’s that robe that I swapped with you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī taṁ cīvaraṁ nīharitvā thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā dassesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She brought out the robe and showed it to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī taṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and Thullanandā said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handāyye, tuyhaṁ cīvaraṁ, āhara metaṁ cīvaraṁ, yaṁ tuyhaṁ tuyhamevetaṁ, yaṁ mayhaṁ mayhamevetaṁ, āhara metaṁ, sakaṁ paccāharā”ti acchindi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Here’s your robe and give me that robe of mine. That which is yours is yours and that which is mine is mine. Give me that and take back what’s yours.” And she just took it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun then told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ cīvaraṁ parivattetvā acchindissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā swap a robe with a nun and then take it back?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those nuns then told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ cīvaraṁ parivattetvā acchindatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ cīvaraṁ parivattetvā acchindissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā swap a robe with a nun and then take it back? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ cīvaraṁ parivattetvā sā pacchā evaṁ vadeyya—‘handāyye, tuyhaṁ cīvaraṁ āhara, metaṁ cīvaraṁ, yaṁ tuyhaṁ tuyhamevetaṁ, yaṁ mayhaṁ mayhamevetaṁ, āhara metaṁ, sakaṁ paccāharā’ti acchindeyya vā acchindāpeyya vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun swaps robes with a nun and then says, “Here’s your robe; give me that robe of mine. That which is yours is yours, and that which is mine is mine. Give me that, and take back what’s yours;” and she just takes it or has it taken, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyā saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With a nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāya bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">with another nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Robes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ vikappanupagaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robe-cloth, but not smaller than what can be transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parivattetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Swaps: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parittena vā vipulaṁ, vipulena vā parittaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">much with little or little with much. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchindeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just takes it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ acchindati nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she just takes it herself, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchindāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has it taken: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asks another, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇattā bahukampi acchindati, nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she only asks once, then even if the other takes back many, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā ekabhikkhuniyā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-cloth is to be relinquished to the Sangha of nuns, a group, or an individual nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it’s to be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in Nuns’ Relinquishment 1, [](pli-tv-bi-vb-np1:2.1.21--2.1.43), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, ayye, cīvaraṁ bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ parivattetvā acchinnaṁ nissaggiyaṁ, imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘Venerables, this robe-cloth, which I took back after swapping it with a nun, is to be relinquished. I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyun”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayyāya dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe-cloth back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññā cīvaraṁ parivattetvā acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained and she perceives her as such, and after swapping robe-cloth with her she takes it back or has it taken back, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematikā cīvaraṁ parivattetvā acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and after swapping robe-cloth with her she takes it back or has it taken back, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññā cīvaraṁ parivattetvā acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she does not perceive her as such, and after swapping robe-cloth with her she takes it back or has it taken back, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ parikkhāraṁ parivattetvā acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she swaps another requisite, and then takes it back or has it taken back, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya saddhiṁ cīvaraṁ vā aññaṁ vā parikkhāraṁ parivattetvā acchindati vā acchindāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she swaps robe-cloth or another requisite with someone who is not fully ordained, and then takes it back or has it taken back, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she perceives her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā vā deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the other nun gives it back; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassā vā vissasantī gaṇhāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she takes it on trust from her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
