<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc60_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on monasteries </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">60. Pasākhejātasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">60. The training rule on what is growing on the lower part of the body </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī pasākhe jātaṁ gaṇḍaṁ purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā bhedāpesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain nun was alone with a man, when she had him rupture an abscess growing on the lower part of her body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso taṁ bhikkhuniṁ dūsetuṁ upakkami.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he tried to rape her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā vissaramakāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3"> she cried out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo upadhāvitvā taṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns came rushing to and asked her why. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, ayye, vissaramakāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī pasākhe jātaṁ gaṇḍaṁ purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā bhedāpessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun be alone with a man and have him rupture an abscess growing on the lower part of her body?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī pasākhe jātaṁ gaṇḍaṁ purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā bhedāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī pasākhe jātaṁ gaṇḍaṁ purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā bhedāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī pasākhe jātaṁ gaṇḍaṁ vā rudhitaṁ vā anapaloketvā saṅghaṁ vā gaṇaṁ vā purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā bhedāpeyya vā phālāpeyya vā dhovāpeyya vā ālimpāpeyya vā bandhāpeyya vā mocāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun, alone with a man, without getting permission from the Sangha or a group, has an abscess or a wound situated on the lower part of her body ruptured by him, or split open, washed, anointed, bandaged, or unwrapped by him, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasākhaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The lower part of the body: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhonābhi ubbhajāṇumaṇḍalaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">below the navel and above the knees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Situated: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha jātaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">situated there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇḍo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An abscess: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci gaṇḍo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any kind of abscess. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rudhitaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A wound: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci vaṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any kind of sore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anapaloketvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without getting permission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāpucchā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">without having asked permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunisaṅgho vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha of nuns is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A group: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambahulā bhikkhuniyo vuccanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">several nuns is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puriso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A man: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussapuriso, na yakkho, na peto, na tiracchānagato, viññū paṭibalo dūsetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human male, not a male spirit, not a male ghost, not a male animal. He understands and is capable of raping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekenekāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Alone: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puriso ceva hoti bhikkhunī ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">just the man and the nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhindā”ti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she tells him, “Rupture it,” she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhinne āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been ruptured, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Phālehī”ti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she tells him, “Split it open,” she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phālite āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been split open, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhovā”ti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she tells him, “Wash it,” she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhovite āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been washed, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ālimpā”ti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she tells him, “Anoint it,” she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Litte āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been anointed, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bandhāhī”ti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she tells him, “Bandage it,” she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Baddhe āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been bandaged, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mocehī”ti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she tells him, “Unwrap it,” she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mutte āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been unwrapped, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apaloketvā bhedāpeti vā phālāpeti vā dhovāpeti vā ālimpāpeti vā bandhāpeti vā mocāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gets permission and then has it ruptured, split open, washed, anointed, bandaged, or unwrapped; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci viññū dutiyikā hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has a female companion who understands; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tenth training rule is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmavaggo chaṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth sub-chapter on monasteries is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
