<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc58_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on monasteries </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">58. Ovādasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">58. The training rule on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṁ nigrodhārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying in the Sakyan country in the Banyan Tree Monastery at Kapilavatthu, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo ovadanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six went to the nuns’ dwelling place to instruct the nuns from the group of six. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards other nuns said to those nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ethāyye, ovādaṁ gamissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Venerables, let’s go to the instruction.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi mayaṁ, ayye, gaccheyyāma ovādassa kāraṇā, ayyā chabbaggiyā idheva āgantvā amhe ovadantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no need. The monks from the group of six came and instructed us right here.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo ovādaṁ na gacchissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns from the group of six not go to the instruction?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo ovādaṁ na gacchantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that those nuns didn’t do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo ovādaṁ na gacchissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns from the group of six not do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī ovādāya vā saṁvāsāya vā na gaccheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun does not go to the instruction or take part in a formal meeting of the community, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The instruction: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭha garudhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the eight important principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvāso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The community: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekakammaṁ ekuddeso samasikkhatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">joint legal procedures, a joint recitation, the same training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādāya vā saṁvāsāya vā na gacchissāmīti dhuraṁ nikkhittamatte āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she thinks, “I won’t go to the instruction or take part in a formal meeting of the community,” then by the mere fact of giving up her duty, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati antarāye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is an obstacle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesitvā dutiyikaṁ bhikkhuniṁ na labhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she searches for a companion nun, but does not find one; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
