<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc39_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuvaṭṭavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying down </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">39. Antovassasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">39. The training rule on during the rainy season </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo antovassaṁ cārikaṁ caranti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nuns went wandering during the rainy season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo antovassaṁ cārikaṁ carissanti haritāni tiṇāni ca sammaddantā, ekindriyaṁ jīvaṁ viheṭhentā, bahū khuddake pāṇe saṅghātaṁ āpādentā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns go wandering during the rainy season? They are trampling down the green grass, harming one-sensed life, and destroying many small beings.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo antovassaṁ cārikaṁ carissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns go wandering during the rainy season?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo antovassaṁ cārikaṁ carantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo antovassaṁ cārikaṁ carissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī antovassaṁ cārikaṁ careyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun goes wandering during the rainy season, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antovassanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">During the rainy season: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimaṁ vā temāsaṁ pacchimaṁ vā temāsaṁ avasitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">not having stayed put for the first three or the last three months of the rainy season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cārikaṁ careyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Goes wandering: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuṭasampāte gāme gāmantare gāmantare āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the villages are a chicken’s flight apart, then for every next village she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agāmake araññe addhayojane addhayojane āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it is an uninhabited area, a wilderness, then for every six kilometers she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattāhakaraṇīyena gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she goes on seven-day business; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kenaci ubbāḷhā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she goes because something is disturbing her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ninth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
