<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc2_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2. Sambādhalomasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">2. The training rule on the hair of the private parts </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo sambādhe lomaṁ saṁharāpetvā aciravatiyā nadiyā vesiyāhi saddhiṁ naggā ekatitthe nahāyanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nuns from the group of six removed the hair from their private parts. They then bathed naked at a ford in the river Aciravatī together with sex workers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vesiyā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sex workers complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo sambādhe lomaṁ saṁharāpessanti, seyyathāpi gihiniyo kāmabhoginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns remove the hair from their private parts? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tāsaṁ vesiyānaṁ ujjhāyantīnaṁ khiyyantīnaṁ vipācentīnaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those sex workers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo sambādhe lomaṁ saṁharāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six remove the hair from their private parts?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo sambādhe lomaṁ saṁharāpentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that those nuns do that?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo sambādhe lomaṁ saṁharāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group do that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī sambādhe lomaṁ saṁharāpeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun removes hair from her private parts, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sambādho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The private parts: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho upakacchakā, muttakaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">both armpits and the groin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁharāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Removes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekampi lomaṁ saṁharāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she removes one hair, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahukepi lome saṁharāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even if she removes many hairs, she commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ābādhapaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does it because she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
