<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc79_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kumāribhūtavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on unmarried girls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">79. Sokāvāsasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">79. The training rule on one who is difficult to live with </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī purisasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ kumārakasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ caṇḍiṁ sokāvāsaṁ caṇḍakāḷiṁ sikkhamānaṁ vuṭṭhāpeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā gave the full admission to the trainee nun Caṇḍakāḷī, who was socializing with men and boys, and who was temperamental and difficult to live with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā purisasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ kumārakasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ caṇḍiṁ sokāvāsaṁ caṇḍakāḷiṁ sikkhamānaṁ vuṭṭhāpessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā give the full admission to the trainee nun Caṇḍakāḷī, who is socializing with men and boys, and who is temperamental and difficult to live with?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī purisasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ kumārakasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ caṇḍiṁ sokāvāsaṁ caṇḍakāḷiṁ sikkhamānaṁ vuṭṭhāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī purisasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ kumārakasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ caṇḍiṁ sokāvāsaṁ caṇḍakāḷiṁ sikkhamānaṁ vuṭṭhāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī purisasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ kumārakasaṁsaṭṭhaṁ caṇḍiṁ sokāvāsaṁ sikkhamānaṁ vuṭṭhāpeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun gives the full admission to a trainee nun who is socializing with men and boys and who is temperamental and difficult to live with, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puriso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Men: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pattavīsativasso.</span></p>
<p class="p3">those who have reached twenty years of age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kumārako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Boys: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appattavīsativasso.</span></p>
<p class="p3">those who have not reached twenty years of age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁsaṭṭhā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Socializing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ananulomikena kāyikavācasikena saṁsaṭṭhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she socializes with improper bodily and verbal actions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṇḍī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Temperamental: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodhanā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">angry is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sokāvāsā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Difficult to live with: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paresaṁ dukkhaṁ uppādeti, sokaṁ āvisati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she causes suffering to others, and grieves herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhamānā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A trainee nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who has trained for two years in the six rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives the full admission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampādeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gives the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vuṭṭhāpessāmī”ti gaṇaṁ vā ācariniṁ vā pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā pariyesati, sīmaṁ vā sammannati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, intending to give the full admission, she searches for a group, a teacher, a bowl, or a robe, or she establishes a monastic boundary, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi dukkaṭā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne upajjhāyāya āpatti pācittiyassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, the preceptor commits an offense entailing confession, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gaṇassa ca ācariniyā ca āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the group and the teacher commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantī vuṭṭhāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives her the full admission without knowing what she is like; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ninth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
