<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc25_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">25. Cīvarasaṅkamanīyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">25. The training rule on borrowed robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī piṇḍāya caritvā allacīvaraṁ pattharitvā vihāraṁ pāvisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there was a nun who, after walking for almsfood, spread out her moist robe and entered her dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatarā bhikkhunī taṁ cīvaraṁ pārupitvā gāmaṁ piṇḍāya pāvisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second nun put on that robe and entered the village for almsfood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā nikkhamitvā bhikkhuniyo pucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the first nun came out and asked the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“apāyye, mayhaṁ cīvaraṁ passeyyāthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, have you seen my robe?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo tassā bhikkhuniyā etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns told her what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She then complained and criticized the second nun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī mayhaṁ cīvaraṁ anāpucchā pārupissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun put on my robe without asking permission?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She told the nuns what had happened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ anāpucchā pārupissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun put on another nun’s robe without asking permission?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ anāpucchā pārupatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ anāpucchā pārupissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī cīvarasaṅkamanīyaṁ dhāreyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun wears a robe taken on loan, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvarasaṅkamanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A robe taken on loan: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannāya pañcannaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ tassā vā adinnaṁ taṁ vā anāpucchā nivāseti vā pārupati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she wears any of the five robes belonging to a fully ordained nun, and it has not been given to her, nor has she asked permission to use it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññā cīvarasaṅkamanīyaṁ dhāreti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and she perceives her as such, and she takes on loan a robe belonging to her and then wears it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematikā cīvarasaṅkamanīyaṁ dhāreti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and she takes on loan a robe belonging to her and then wears it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññā cīvarasaṅkamanīyaṁ dhāreti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she does not perceive her as such, and she takes on loan a robe belonging to her and then wears it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya cīvarasaṅkamanīyaṁ dhāreti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she takes on loan a robe belonging to her and then wears it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she perceives her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā vā deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the robe has been given to her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṁ vā āpucchā nivāseti vā pārupati vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she wears it after asking permission; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acchinnacīvarikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if her own robe has been stolen; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">naṭṭhacīvarikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if her own robe has been lost; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
