<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc14_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattandhakāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the dark of the night </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">14. Dutiyikauyyojanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">14. The training rule on dismissing a companion </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī rathikāyapi byūhepi siṅghāṭakepi purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā santiṭṭhatipi sallapatipi nikaṇṇikampi jappeti dutiyikampi bhikkhuniṁ uyyojeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā stood and talked alone with men on streets, in cul-de-sacs, and at intersections, and she whispered in their ears and dismissed her companion nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā rathikāyapi byūhepi siṅghāṭakepi purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā santiṭṭhissatipi sallapissatipi nikaṇṇikampi jappissati dutiyikampi bhikkhuniṁ uyyojessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Thullanandā do such things?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī rathikāyapi byūhepi siṅghāṭakepi purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā santiṭṭhatipi sallapatipi nikaṇṇikampi jappeti dutiyikampi bhikkhuniṁ uyyojetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā does this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī rathikāyapi byūhepi siṅghāṭakepi purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā santiṭṭhissatipi sallapissatipi nikaṇṇikampi jappissati dutiyikampi bhikkhuniṁ uyyojessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nun Thullanandā do such things? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī rathikāya vā byūhe vā siṅghāṭake vā purisena saddhiṁ ekenekā santiṭṭheyya vā sallapeyya vā nikaṇṇikaṁ vā jappeyya dutiyikaṁ vā bhikkhuniṁ uyyojeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun stands or talks alone with a man on a street or in a cul-de-sac or at an intersection, or she whispers in his ear or dismisses her companion nun, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rathikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A street: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">racchā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a carriage road is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byūhaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A cul-de-sac: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yeneva pavisanti teneva nikkhamanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one departs the same way one enters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siṅghāṭako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An intersection: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">caccaraṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a crossroads is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puriso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A man: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussapuriso na yakkho na peto na tiracchānagato viññū paṭibalo santiṭṭhituṁ sallapituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human male, not a male spirit, not a male ghost, not a male animal. He understands and is capable of standing together and talking. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekenekāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Alone: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puriso ceva hoti bhikkhunī ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">just the man and the nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santiṭṭheyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Stands with: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisassa hatthapāse tiṭṭhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she stands within arm’s reach of the man, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sallapeyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Talks with: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisassa hatthapāse ṭhitā sallapati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she stands talking within arm’s reach of the man, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikaṇṇikaṁ vā jappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whispers in his ear: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisassa upakaṇṇake āroceti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she speaks into the ear of a man, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyikaṁ vā bhikkhuniṁ uyyojeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dismisses her companion nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anācāraṁ ācaritukāmā dutiyikampi bhikkhuniṁ uyyojeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, wanting to misbehave, she dismisses her companion nun, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vā savanūpacāraṁ vā vijahantiyā āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the companion nun is in the process of going beyond the range of sight or the range of hearing, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijahite āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the companion nun has gone beyond, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthapāsaṁ vijahitvā santiṭṭhati vā sallapati vā āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stands or talks outside of arm’s reach, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yakkhena vā petena vā paṇḍakena vā tiracchānagatamanussaviggahena vā saddhiṁ santiṭṭhati vā sallapati vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stands or talks with a male spirit, a male ghost, a _paṇḍaka_, or a male animal in human form, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci viññū dutiyo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has a companion who understands; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">arahopekkhā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is not seeking privacy; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññavihitā santiṭṭhati vā sallapati vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she stands or talks thinking of something else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na anācāraṁ ācaritukāmā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not want to misbehave; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati karaṇīye dutiyikaṁ bhikkhuniṁ uyyojeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she dismisses her companion nun when there is something to be done; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
