<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc95_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattupāhanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on sunshades and sandals </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">95. Pañhāpucchanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">95. The training rule on asking questions </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo anokāsakataṁ bhikkhuṁ pañhaṁ pucchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nuns asked questions of a monk who had not given permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo anokāsakataṁ bhikkhuṁ pañhaṁ pucchissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns ask questions of a monk who hasn’t given permission?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo anokāsakataṁ bhikkhuṁ pañhaṁ pucchantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo anokāsakataṁ bhikkhuṁ pañhaṁ pucchissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī anokāsakataṁ bhikkhuṁ pañhaṁ puccheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun asks a question of a monk who has not given permission, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anokāsakatanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has not given permission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāpucchā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">without asking permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who is fully ordained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañhaṁ puccheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Asks a question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttante okāsaṁ kārāpetvā vinayaṁ vā abhidhammaṁ vā pucchati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gets permission to ask about the discourses, but she asks about the Monastic Law or philosophy, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vinaye okāsaṁ kārāpetvā suttantaṁ vā abhidhammaṁ vā pucchati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she gets permission to ask about the Monastic Law, but she asks about the discourses or philosophy, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhidhamme okāsaṁ kārāpetvā suttantaṁ vā vinayaṁ vā pucchati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she gets permission to ask about philosophy, but she asks about the discourses or the Monastic Law, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite anāpucchitasaññā pañhaṁ pucchati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, and she does not perceive that she has, and she asks a question, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite vematikā pañhaṁ pucchati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, but she is unsure of it, and she asks a question, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite āpucchitasaññā pañhaṁ pucchati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, but she perceives that she has, and she asks a question, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite anāpucchitasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, but she does not perceive that she has, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite āpucchitasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, and she perceives that she has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">okāsaṁ kārāpetvā pucchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asks after getting permission; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anodissa okāsaṁ kārāpetvā yattha katthaci pucchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gets permission, but not in regard to a specific subject, and she then asks about any subject; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvādasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The twelfth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
