<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc24_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">24. Saṅghāṭicārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">24. The training rule on moving the robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo bhikkhunīnaṁ hatthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā santaruttarena janapadacārikaṁ pakkamanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nuns stored one of their robes with other nuns and then left to wander the country in a sarong and an upper robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni cīvarāni ciraṁ nikkhittāni kaṇṇakitāni honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because they were stored for a long time, the robes became moldy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni bhikkhuniyo otāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the nuns put them out to sun them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo tā bhikkhuniyo etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">other nuns asked them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kassimāni, ayye, cīvarāni kaṇṇakitānī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whose moldy robes are these?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo bhikkhunīnaṁ hatthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā santaruttarena janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns store one of their robes with other nuns and then go wandering the country in a sarong and an upper robe?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo bhikkhunīnaṁ hatthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā santaruttarena janapadacārikaṁ pakkamantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo bhikkhunīnaṁ hatthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā santaruttarena janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī pañcāhikaṁ saṅghāṭicāraṁ atikkāmeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun does not move her robes for more than five days, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcāhikaṁ saṅghāṭicāraṁ atikkāmeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Does not move her robes for more than five days: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcamaṁ divasaṁ pañca cīvarāni neva nivāseti na pārupati na otāpeti, pañcamaṁ divasaṁ atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not wear or sun her five robes on the fifth day, then, when the fifth day has passed, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcāhātikkante atikkantasaññā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than five days, and she perceives it as more, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcāhātikkante vematikā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than five days, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcāhātikkante anatikkantasaññā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than five days, but she perceives it as less, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcāhānatikkante atikkantasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than five days, but she perceives it as more, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcāhānatikkante vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than five days, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcāhānatikkante anatikkantasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than five days and she perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcamaṁ divasaṁ pañca cīvarāni nivāseti vā pārupati vā otāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she wears or suns the five robes on the fifth day; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
