<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc22_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">22. Udakasāṭikasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">22. The training rule on bathing robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavatā bhikkhunīnaṁ udakasāṭikā anuññātā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the Buddha had allowed bathing robes for the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā udakasāṭikā anuññātā”ti appamāṇikāyo udakasāṭikāyo dhāresuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing this, the nuns from the group of six wore bathing robes of inappropriate size. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puratopi pacchatopi ākaḍḍhantā āhiṇḍanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As they were walking about, they were dragging them along, both in front and behind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo appamāṇikāyo udakasāṭikāyo dhāressantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six wear such bathing robes?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo appamāṇikāyo udakasāṭikāyo dhārentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nuns from the group of six do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo appamāṇikāyo udakasāṭikāyo dhāressanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six wear such bathing robes? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Udakasāṭikaṁ pana bhikkhuniyā kārayamānāya pamāṇikā kāretabbā. Tatridaṁ pamāṇaṁ—dīghaso catasso vidatthiyo, sugatavidatthiyā; tiriyaṁ dve vidatthiyo. Taṁ atikkāmentiyā chedanakaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun is having a bathing robe made, it should be made the right size. This is the right size: four standard handspans long and two wide. If it exceeds that, it is to be cut down, and she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakasāṭikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A bathing robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāya nivatthā nahāyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wearing it as a sarong, she bathes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārayamānāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is having made: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karontiyā vā kārāpentiyā vā. Pamāṇikā kāretabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">making it herself or having someone else make it, it should be made the right size. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṁ pamāṇaṁ— dīghaso catasso vidatthiyo, sugatavidatthiyā; tiriyaṁ dve vidatthiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the right size: four standard handspans long and two wide. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ atikkāmetvā karoti vā kārāpeti vā, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she makes one or has one made that exceeds that, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena chinditvā pācittiyaṁ desetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she gets it, it is to be cut down, and she is then to confess an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she finishes what she began herself, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has others finish what she began herself, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she finishes herself what was begun by others, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has others finish what was begun by others, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññassatthāya karoti vā kārāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she makes one or has one made for the benefit of someone else, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she gets one that was made by someone else and then uses it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pamāṇikaṁ karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she makes it the right size; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakaṁ karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she makes it smaller than the right size; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññena kataṁ pamāṇātikkantaṁ paṭilabhitvā chinditvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gets one made by someone else that exceeds the right size and she cuts it down before using it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitānaṁ vā bhūmattharaṇaṁ vā sāṇipākāraṁ vā bhisiṁ vā bibbohanaṁ vā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she makes a canopy, a floor cover, a cloth screen, a mattress, or a pillow; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
