<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc76_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kumāribhūtavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on unmarried girls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">76. Khīyanadhammasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">76. The training rule on criticizing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nun Caṇḍakāḷī approached the Sangha of nuns and asked for approval to give the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhikkhunisaṅgho caṇḍakāḷiṁ bhikkhuniṁ paricchinditvā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha of nuns </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṁ tāva te, ayye, vuṭṭhāpitenā”ti, vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ na adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">decided that she should not, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī “sādhū”ti paṭissuṇi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and Caṇḍakāḷī consented. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhunisaṅgho aññāsaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ deti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Sangha of nuns gave approval to other nuns to give the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Caṇḍakāḷī complained and criticized it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahameva nūna bālā, ahameva nūna alajjinī;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“So it seems I’m ignorant and shameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ saṅgho aññāsaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ deti, mayhameva na detī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">since the Sangha gives approval to other nuns, but not to me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā caṇḍakāḷī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Caṇḍakāḷī </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘alaṁ tāva te, ayye, vuṭṭhāpitenā’ti vuccamānā ‘sādhū’ti paṭissuṇitvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">consent to not being approved to give the full admission, and then criticize it afterwards?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī ‘alaṁ tāva te, ayye, vuṭṭhāpitenā’ti vuccamānā ‘sādhū’ti paṭissuṇitvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Caṇḍakāḷī did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Caṇḍakāḷī </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘alaṁ tāva te, ayye, vuṭṭhāpitenā’ti vuccamānā ‘sādhū’ti paṭissuṇitvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī—‘alaṁ tāva te, ayye, vuṭṭhāpitenā’ti vuccamānā ‘sādhū’ti paṭissuṇitvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun is told, “Venerable, you have given enough full admissions for now,” and she consents, saying, “Fine,” but then criticizes it afterwards, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alaṁ tāva te, ayye, vuṭṭhāpitenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable, you have given enough full admissions for now: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">alaṁ tāva te, ayye, upasampāditena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable, you have given enough full ordinations for now. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhū”ti paṭissuṇitvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she consents, saying, “Fine,” but then criticizes it afterwards, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pakatiyā chandā dosā mohā bhayā karontaṁ khiyyati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she criticizes one who regularly acts out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, or fear; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
