<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc15_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattandhakāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the dark of the night </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">15. Anāpucchāpakkamanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">15. The training rule on departing without taking leave </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī aññatarassa kulassa kulūpikā hoti niccabhattikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a certain nun was associating with a family from which she received a regular meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena taṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āsane nisīditvā sāmike anāpucchā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after robing up one morning, she took her bowl and robe and went to that family, where she sat down on a seat. She then departed without taking leave of the owners. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kulassa dāsī gharaṁ sammajjantī taṁ āsanaṁ bhājanantarikāya pakkhipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards, a slave-woman who was sweeping the house put that seat in between some vessels. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā taṁ āsanaṁ apassantā taṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not seeing the seat, the people there asked that nun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kahaṁ taṁ, ayye, āsanan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, where’s that seat?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṁ taṁ, āvuso, āsanaṁ passāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t know.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dethāyye, taṁ āsanan”ti paribhāsitvā niccabhattaṁ pacchindiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give back the seat, Venerable.” And after scolding her, they made an end of her regular meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te manussā gharaṁ sodhentā taṁ āsanaṁ bhājanantarikāya passitvā taṁ bhikkhuniṁ khamāpetvā niccabhattaṁ paṭṭhapesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, while those people were cleaning the house, they saw that seat in between those vessels. They asked that nun for forgiveness and restored her regular meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun then told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī purebhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā āsane nisīditvā sāmike anāpucchā pakkamissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun visit a family before the meal, sit down on a seat, and then depart without taking leave of the owners?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī purebhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā āsane nisīditvā sāmike anāpucchā pakkamatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave bhikkhunī purebhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā āsane nisīditvā sāmike anāpucchā pakkamissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī purebhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā āsane nisīditvā sāmike anāpucchā pakkameyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun visits families before the meal, sits down on a seat, and then departs without taking leave of the owners, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purebhattaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Before the meal: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aruṇuggamanaṁ upādāya yāva majjhanhikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from dawn until midday. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A family: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri kulāni— khattiyakulaṁ, brāhmaṇakulaṁ, vessakulaṁ, suddakulaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of families: the aristocratic family, the brahmin family, the merchant family, the worker family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasaṅkamitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Visits: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha gantvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">goes there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A seat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pallaṅkassa okāso vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a place for sitting cross-legged is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīditvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sits down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ nisīditvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">sits down on that seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmike anāpucchā pakkameyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Departs without taking leave of the owners: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo tasmiṁ kule manusso viññū taṁ anāpucchā anovassakaṁ atikkāmentiyā āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, without taking leave of a person who understands in that family, she goes beyond the roof cover of that house, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhokāse upacāraṁ atikkāmentiyā āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is out in the open and she goes beyond the vicinity of the seat, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite anāpucchitasaññā pakkamati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not taken leave, and she does not perceive that she has, and she departs, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite vematikā pakkamati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not taken leave, but she is unsure of it, and she departs, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite āpucchitasaññā pakkamati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not taken leave, but she perceives that she has, and she departs, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pallaṅkassa anokāse āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a place for sitting cross-legged, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite anāpucchitasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has taken leave, but she does not perceive that she has, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has taken leave, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite āpucchitasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has taken leave, and she perceives that she has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpucchā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she departs after taking leave; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṁhārime,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the seat is not movable; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
