<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc9_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">9. Dutiyauccārachaḍḍanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">9. The second training rule on disposing of feces </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa brāhmaṇassa bhikkhunupassayaṁ nissāya yavakhettaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a brahmin had a barley field next to the nuns’ dwelling place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo uccārampi passāvampi saṅkārampi vighāsampi khette chaḍḍenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns disposed of feces, urine, trash, and food scraps in that field. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmin complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo amhākaṁ yavakhettaṁ dūsessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns spoil my barley field?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tassa brāhmaṇassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of that brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo uccārampi passāvampi saṅkārampi vighāsampi harite chaḍḍessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns dispose of feces, urine, trash, and food scraps on cultivated plants?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo uccārampi passāvampi saṅkārampi vighāsampi harite chaḍḍentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo uccārampi passāvampi saṅkārampi vighāsampi harite chaḍḍessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā saṅkāraṁ vā vighāsaṁ vā harite chaḍḍeyya vā chaḍḍāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun disposes of feces or urine or trash or food scraps on cultivated plants, or she has it disposed of in this way, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uccāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Feces: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gūtho vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">excrement is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passāvo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Urine: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muttaṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">pee is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkāraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Trash: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kacavaraṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">refuse is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vighāsaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Food scraps: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">calakāni vā aṭṭhikāni vā ucchiṭṭhodakaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">food remnants or bones or used water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Haritaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cultivated plants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbaṇṇaṁ aparaṇṇaṁ yaṁ manussānaṁ upabhogaparibhogaṁ ropimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">grain, vegetables, whatever cultivated plants people consider valuable or useful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaḍḍeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Disposes of: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ chaḍḍeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she disposes of it herself, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaḍḍāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has it disposed of: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asks another, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇattā bahukampi chaḍḍeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she only asks once, then even if the other disposes of such things many times, she commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Harite haritasaññā chaḍḍeti vā chaḍḍāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are cultivated plants, and she perceives them as such, and she disposes of it or has it disposed of, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Harite vematikā chaḍḍeti vā chaḍḍāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are cultivated plants, but she is unsure of it, and she disposes of it or has it disposed of, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Harite aharitasaññā chaḍḍeti vā chaḍḍāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are cultivated plants, but she perceives them as uncultivated, and she disposes of it or has it disposed of, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aharite haritasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are uncultivated plants, but she perceives them as cultivated, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aharite vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are uncultivated plants, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aharite aharitasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are uncultivated plants, and she perceives them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">oloketvā chaḍḍeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she disposes of it after having looked; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khettamariyāde chaḍḍeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she disposes of it at the edge of the field; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmike āpucchitvā apaloketvā chaḍḍeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she disposes of it after asking and getting permission from the owners; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ninth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
