<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc72_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kumāribhūtavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on unmarried girls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">72. Dutiyakumāribhūtasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">72. The second training rule on unmarried girls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo paripuṇṇavīsativassaṁ kumāribhūtaṁ dve vassāni chasu dhammesu asikkhitasikkhaṁ vuṭṭhāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nuns were giving the full admission to unmarried girls who were more than twenty years old, but who had not trained for two years in the six rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā bālā honti abyattā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">They were ignorant and incompetent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jānanti kappiyaṁ vā akappiyaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they did not know what was allowable and what was not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo paripuṇṇavīsativassaṁ kumāribhūtaṁ dve vassāni chasu dhammesu asikkhitasikkhaṁ vuṭṭhāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns give the full admission to unmarried girls who are more than twenty years old, but who haven’t trained for two years in the six rules?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo paripuṇṇavīsativassaṁ kumāribhūtaṁ dve vassāni chasu dhammesu asikkhitasikkhaṁ vuṭṭhāpentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo paripuṇṇavīsativassaṁ kumāribhūtaṁ dve vassāni chasu dhammesu asikkhitasikkhaṁ vuṭṭhāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vigarahitvā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and after criticizing them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, aṭṭhārasavassāya kumāribhūtāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhāsammutiṁ dātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, approval is required for an unmarried girl who is eighteen years old to train in the six rules for two years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the approval is to be given like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya aṭṭhārasavassāya kumāribhūtāya saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā bhikkhunīnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha of nuns, that unmarried girl who is eighteen years old should put her upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the nuns. She should then squat on her heels, raise her joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṁ, ayye, itthannāmā itthannāmāya ayyāya aṭṭhārasavassā kumāribhūtā saṅghaṁ dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhāsammutiṁ yācāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, I, so-and-so, an unmarried girl who is eighteen years old, am training under Venerable so-and-so. I ask the Sangha for approval to train for two years in the six rules.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she should ask a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable nun should then inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā itthannāmāya ayyāya aṭṭhārasavassā kumāribhūtā saṅghaṁ dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhāsammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This unmarried girl so-and-so, who is eighteen years old and training under Venerable so-and-so, is asking the Sangha for approval to train in the six rules for two years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmāya aṭṭhārasavassāya kumāribhūtāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhāsammutiṁ dadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should give approval to the unmarried girl so-and-so who is eighteen years old to train in the six rules for two years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā itthannāmāya ayyāya aṭṭhārasavassā kumāribhūtā saṅghaṁ dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhāsammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This unmarried girl so-and-so, who is eighteen years old and training under Venerable so-and-so, is asking the Sangha for approval to train in the six rules for two years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmāya aṭṭhārasavassāya kumāribhūtāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhāsammutiṁ deti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha gives approval to the unmarried girl so-and-so who is eighteen years old to train in the six rules for two years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassā ayyāya khamati itthannāmāya aṭṭhārasavassāya kumāribhūtāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhāsammutiyā dānaṁ, sā tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who approves of giving approval to the unmarried girl so-and-so who is eighteen years old to train in the six rules for two years should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā nakkhamati, sā bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dinnā saṅghena itthannāmāya aṭṭhārasavassāya kumāribhūtāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhāsammuti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has given approval to the unmarried girl so-and-so who is eighteen years old to train in the six rules for two years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā aṭṭhārasavassā kumāribhūtā evaṁ vadehīti vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That unmarried girl who is eighteen years old should be told to say this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pāṇātipātā veramaṇiṁ dve vassāni avītikkamma samādānaṁ samādiyāmi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I undertake to abstain from killing living beings for two years without transgression. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vikālabhojanā veramaṇiṁ dve vassāni avītikkamma samādānaṁ samādiyāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I undertake to abstain from eating at the wrong time for two years without transgression.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tā bhikkhuniyo anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā dubbharatāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after criticizing those nuns in many ways, the Buddha spoke in dispraise of being difficult to support … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī paripuṇṇavīsativassaṁ kumāribhūtaṁ dve vassāni chasu dhammesu asikkhitasikkhaṁ vuṭṭhāpeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun gives the full admission to an unmarried girl who is more than twenty years old, but who has not trained in the six rules for two years, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripuṇṇavīsativassā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is more than twenty years old: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pattavīsativassā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has reached twenty years of age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kumāribhūtā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unmarried girl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇerī vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a novice nun is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve vassānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two years: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve saṁvaccharāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">two twelve-month periods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asikkhitasikkhā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has not trained: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhā vā na dinnā hoti, dinnā vā sikkhā kupitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the training has not been given to her, or the training has been given to her, but she has failed in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives the full admission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampādeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gives the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vuṭṭhāpessāmī”ti gaṇaṁ vā ācariniṁ vā pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā pariyesati, sīmaṁ vā sammannati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, intending to give the full admission, she searches for a group, a teacher, a bowl, or a robe, or she establishes a monastic boundary, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi dukkaṭā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne upajjhāyāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, the preceptor commits an offense entailing confession, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇassa ca ācariniyā ca āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the group and the teacher commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, and she gives the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematikā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, and she gives the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as illegitimate, and she gives the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as legitimate, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paripuṇṇavīsativassaṁ kumāribhūtaṁ dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhaṁ vuṭṭhāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives the full admission to an unmarried girl who is more than twenty years old, and who has trained in the six rules for two years; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
