<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc69_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gabbhinivagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pregnant women </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">69. Pavattinīnānubandhanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">69. The training rule on not following one’s mentor </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo vuṭṭhāpitaṁ pavattiniṁ dve vassāni nānubandhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time nuns who had received the full admission did not follow their mentor for two years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā bālā honti abyattā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">They were ignorant and incompetent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jānanti kappiyaṁ vā akappiyaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they did not know what was allowable and what was not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo vuṭṭhāpitaṁ pavattiniṁ dve vassāni nānubandhissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those nuns receive the full admission and then not follow their mentor for two years?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo vuṭṭhāpitaṁ pavattiniṁ dve vassāni nānubandhantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns don’t do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo vuṭṭhāpitaṁ pavattiniṁ dve vassāni nānubandhissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns not do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī vuṭṭhāpitaṁ pavattiniṁ dve vassāni nānubandheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun does not follow the mentor who gave her the full admission for two years, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhāpitanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who gave her the full admission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampāditaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who gave her the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavattinī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The mentor: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upajjhāyā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the preceptor is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve vassānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two years: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve saṁvaccharāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">two twelve-month periods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānubandheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Does not follow: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sayaṁ upaṭṭhaheyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">does not herself attend on her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve vassāni nānubandhissāmīti dhuraṁ nikkhittamatte āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she thinks, “I won’t follow her for two years,” then by the mere fact of giving up her duty, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upajjhāyā bālā vā hoti alajjinī vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the preceptor is ignorant or shameless; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ninth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
