<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc5_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">5. Udakasuddhikasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">5. The training rule on cleaning with water </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṁ nigrodhārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying in the Sakyan country in the Banyan Tree Monastery at Kapilavatthu, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahāpajāpati gotamī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā adhovāte aṭṭhāsi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahāpajāpati Gotamī went to him and bowed. Standing downwind from him, she said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“duggandho, bhagavā, mātugāmo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Sir, women smell.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ādiyantu kho bhikkhuniyo udakasuddhikan”ti, mahāpajāpatiṁ gotamiṁ dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṁsesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, the nuns should clean themselves with water.” And the Buddha instructed, inspired, and gladdened her with a teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahāpajāpati gotamī bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṁsitā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">after which she bowed down, circumambulated him with her right side toward him, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, bhikkhunīnaṁ udakasuddhikan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow the nuns to clean themselves with water.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Being aware that the Buddha had allowed cleaning with water, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā udakasuddhikā anuññātā”ti atigambhīraṁ udakasuddhikaṁ ādiyantī muttakaraṇe vaṇaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun did it too deeply, causing a sore in her vagina. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī atigambhīraṁ udakasuddhikaṁ ādiyissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun clean herself too deeply with water?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī atigambhīraṁ udakasuddhikaṁ ādiyatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī atigambhīraṁ udakasuddhikaṁ ādiyissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun clean herself too deeply with water? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Udakasuddhikaṁ pana bhikkhuniyā ādiyamānāya dvaṅgulapabbaparamaṁ ādātabbaṁ. Taṁ atikkāmentiyā pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun is cleaning herself with water, she may insert two finger joints at the most. If she goes beyond that, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakasuddhikaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is cleaning herself with water: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muttakaraṇassa dhovanā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">washing the vagina is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādiyamānāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cleaning: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhovantiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">washes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvaṅgulapabbaparamaṁ ādātabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">She may insert two finger joints at the most: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvīsu aṅgulesu dve pabbaparamā ādātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she may insert two joints of two fingers at the most. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ atikkāmentiyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she goes beyond that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samphassaṁ sādiyantī antamaso kesaggamattampi atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she consents to the contact and goes beyond even by a hair’s breadth, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekadvaṅgulapabbe atirekasaññā ādiyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than two finger joints, and she perceives it as more, and she inserts them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekadvaṅgulapabbe vematikā ādiyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than two finger joints, but she is unsure of it, and she inserts them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekadvaṅgulapabbe ūnakasaññā ādiyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than two finger joints, but she perceives it as less, and she inserts them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakadvaṅgulapabbe atirekasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than two finger joints, but she perceives it as more, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakadvaṅgulapabbe vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than two finger joints, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakadvaṅgulapabbe ūnakasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than two finger joints, and she perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvaṅgulapabbaparamaṁ ādiyati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she inserts two finger joints; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakadvaṅgulapabbaparamaṁ ādiyati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she inserts less than two finger joints; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ābādhapaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does it because she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
