<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc36_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuvaṭṭavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying down </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">36. Saṁsaṭṭhasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">36. The training rule on socializing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī saṁsaṭṭhā viharati gahapatināpi gahapatiputtenapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nun Caṇḍakāḷī was socializing with a householder and their child. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā caṇḍakāḷī saṁsaṭṭhā viharissati gahapatināpi gahapatiputtenapī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Caṇḍakāḷī socialize with a householder and their child?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī saṁsaṭṭhā viharati gahapatināpi gahapatiputtenapī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Caṇḍakāḷī does this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī saṁsaṭṭhā viharissati gahapatināpi gahapatiputtenapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nun Caṇḍakāḷī do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī saṁsaṭṭhā vihareyya gahapatinā vā gahapatiputtena vā sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi evamassa vacanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun is socializing with a householder or a householder’s child, the nuns should correct her like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘māyye, saṁsaṭṭhā vihari gahapatināpi gahapatiputtenapi. Viviccāyye; vivekaññeva bhaginiyā saṅgho vaṇṇetī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, don’t socialize with householders or householders’ children. Be secluded, Venerable. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi vuccamānā tatheva paggaṇheyya, sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsitabbā tassa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that nun continues as before, the nuns should press her up to three times to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyañce samanubhāsīyamānā taṁ paṭinissajjeyya, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ; no ce paṭinissajjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she then stops, all is well. If she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁsaṭṭhā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Socializing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ananulomikena kāyikavācasikena saṁsaṭṭhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she socializes with improper bodily and verbal actions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapatiputto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder’s child: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci puttabhātaro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever is a child or a sibling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā sā saṁsaṭṭhā bhikkhunī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nun who is socializing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāhi bhikkhunīhi. Yā passanti yā suṇanti tāhi vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other nuns who see it or hear about it. They should correct her like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyye, saṁsaṭṭhā vihari gahapatināpi gahapatiputtenapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, don’t socialize with householders or householders’ children. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viviccāyye;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Be secluded, Venerable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivekaññeva bhaginiyā saṅgho vaṇṇetī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct her a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvā na vadanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If those who heard about it do not say anything, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī saṅghamajjhampi ākaḍḍhitvā vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun, even if she has to be pulled into the Sangha, should be corrected like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyye, saṁsaṭṭhā vihari gahapatināpi gahapatiputtenapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, don’t socialize with householders or householders’ children. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viviccāyye;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Be secluded, Venerable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivekaññeva bhaginiyā saṅgho vaṇṇetī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They should correct her a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should press her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, she should be pressed like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable nun should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā bhikkhunī saṁsaṭṭhā viharati gahapatināpi gahapatiputtenapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun so-and-so is socializing with householders and householders’ children. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she keeps on doing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuniṁ samanubhāseyya tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should press her to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā bhikkhunī saṁsaṭṭhā viharati gahapatināpi gahapatiputtenapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun so-and-so is socializing with householders and householders’ children. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she keeps on doing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuniṁ samanubhāsati tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha presses her to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassā ayyāya khamati itthannāmāya bhikkhuniyā samanubhāsanā tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya, sā tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who approves of pressing her to make her stop should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā nakkhamati, sā bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the second time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the third time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanubhaṭṭhā saṅghena itthannāmā bhikkhunī tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya;</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has pressed nun so-and-so to stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi dukkaṭā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematikā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as illegitimate, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as legitimate, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asamanubhāsantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has not been pressed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭinissajjantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she stops; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
