<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc51_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on monasteries </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">51. Ārāmapavisanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">51. The training rule on entering monasteries </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū gāmakāvāse ekacīvarā cīvarakammaṁ karonti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a number of monks dressed only in a sarong were making robes in a certain village monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo anāpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisitvā yena te bhikkhū tenupasaṅkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nuns entered that monastery without asking permission and approached those monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo anāpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns enter a monastery without asking permission?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo anāpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns did that?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo anāpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns do that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī anāpucchā ārāmaṁ paviseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun enters a monastery without asking permission, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhunīnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena te bhikkhū tamhā āvāsā pakkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards those monks left that monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo—“ayyā pakkantā”ti ārāmaṁ nāgamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But even though the nuns knew that the monks had left, they did not go there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū punadeva taṁ āvāsaṁ paccāgacchiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon the monks returned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo—“ayyā āgatā”ti āpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisitvā yena te bhikkhū tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the nuns knew that this was the case, they asked permission and then entered that monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā te bhikkhū abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ aṭṭhaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They approached the monks and bowed down to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ ṭhitā kho tā bhikkhuniyo te bhikkhū etadavocuṁ—“kissa tumhe, bhaginiyo, ārāmaṁ neva sammajjittha na pānīyaṁ paribhojanīyaṁ upaṭṭhāpitthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks then said to them, “Sisters, why didn’t you sweep the monastery, or put out water for drinking or water for washing?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavatā, ayyā, sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ—‘na anāpucchā ārāmo pavisitabbo’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha has laid down a training rule that we may not enter a monastery without asking permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena mayaṁ na āgamimhā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why we didn’t do it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, santaṁ bhikkhuṁ āpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, when a monk is available, a nun should enter a monastery only after asking permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā ārāmaṁ paviseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun, when a monk is available, enters a monastery without asking permission, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhunīnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena te bhikkhū tamhā āvāsā pakkamitvā punadeva taṁ āvāsaṁ paccāgacchiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards those monks left that monastery once more, before returning once again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo—“ayyā pakkantā”ti anāpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking that the monks were still away, the nuns entered the monastery without asking permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāsaṁ kukkuccaṁ ahosi—“bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ—‘na santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā ārāmo pavisitabbo’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns became anxious, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayañcamhā santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisimhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We have entered a monastery without asking permission, even though a monk was available. And the Buddha has laid down a training rule against this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci nu kho mayaṁ pācittiyaṁ āpattiṁ āpannā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Could it be that we have committed an offense entailing confession?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And so, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī jānaṁ sabhikkhukaṁ ārāmaṁ anāpucchā paviseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun, knowing that there are monks in a monastery, enters it without asking permission, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti, aññe vā tassā ārocenti, te vā ārocenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she knows it by herself or others have told her or they have told her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabhikkhuko nāma ārāmo</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are monks in a monastery: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha bhikkhū rukkhamūlepi vasanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">even where monks stay at the foot of a tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchā ārāmaṁ paviseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Enters it without asking permission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuṁ vā sāmaṇeraṁ vā ārāmikaṁ vā anāpucchā parikkhittassa ārāmassa parikkhepaṁ atikkāmentiyā āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she crosses the boundary of an enclosed monastery without asking permission of a monk or a novice monk or a monastery worker, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittassa ārāmassa upacāraṁ okkamantiyā āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she enters the vicinity of an unenclosed monastery, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabhikkhuke sabhikkhukasaññā santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there are monks in a monastery, and she perceives that there are, and she enters it without asking permission of an available monk, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabhikkhuke vematikā santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there are monks in a monastery, but she is unsure of it, and she enters it without asking permission of an available monk, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabhikkhuke abhikkhukasaññā santaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā ārāmaṁ pavisati, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there are monks in a monastery, but she does not perceive that there are, and she enters it without asking permission of an available monk, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkhuke sabhikkhukasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there are no monks in a monastery, but she perceives that there are, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkhuke vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there are no monks in a monastery, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkhuke abhikkhukasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there are no monks in a monastery, and she does not perceive that there are, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṁ bhikkhuṁ āpucchā pavisati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she enters after asking permission of an available monk; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asantaṁ bhikkhuṁ anāpucchā pavisati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when there is no available monk, she enters without asking permission; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīsānulokikā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she goes while looking at the head of a nun in front of her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha bhikkhuniyo sannipatitā honti tattha gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is going to where the nuns have gathered; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāmena maggo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a path goes through the monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
