<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc6_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">6. Upatiṭṭhanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">6. The training rule on attending on </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena ārohanto nāma mahāmatto bhikkhūsu pabbajito hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a government official called Ārohanta became a monk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa purāṇadutiyikā bhikkhunīsu pabbajitā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and his ex-wife a nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena so bhikkhu tassā bhikkhuniyā santike bhattavissaggaṁ karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion that monk was having his meal in the presence of that nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī tassa bhikkhuno bhuñjantassa pānīyena ca vidhūpanena ca upatiṭṭhitvā accāvadati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">While he was eating, she attended on him with drinking water and a fan, and she flirted with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu taṁ bhikkhuniṁ apasādeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But he dismissed her, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mā, bhagini, evarūpaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t do that; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ kappatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s not allowable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbe maṁ tvaṁ evañca evañca karosi, idāni ettakaṁ na sahasī”ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Before you did such and such to me, but now you can’t even take this much.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pānīyathālakaṁ matthake āsumbhitvā vidhūpanena pahāraṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she dropped the water vessel on its head and struck him with the fan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī bhikkhussa pahāraṁ dassatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun hit a monk?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī bhikkhussa pahāraṁ adāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī bhikkhussa pahāraṁ dassati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun hit a monk? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī bhikkhussa bhuñjantassa pānīyena vā vidhūpanena vā upatiṭṭheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If, when a monk is eating, a nun attends on him with drinking water or a fan, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhussāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">fully ordained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhuñjantassāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is eating: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññataraṁ bhojanaṁ bhuñjantassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">is eating any of the five cooked foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pānīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Drinking water: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci pānīyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any kind of drink. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vidhūpanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A fan: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci bījanī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any kind of fan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upatiṭṭheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Attends on: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthapāse tiṭṭhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she stands within arm’s reach, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññā pānīyena vā vidhūpanena vā upatiṭṭhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is fully ordained, and she perceives him as such, and she attends on him with drinking water or a fan, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematikā pānīyena vā vidhūpanena vā upatiṭṭhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and she attends on him with drinking water or a fan, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññā pānīyena vā vidhūpanena vā upatiṭṭhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is fully ordained, but she does not perceive him as such, and she attends on him with drinking water or a fan, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthapāsaṁ vijahitvā upatiṭṭhati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she attends on him from beyond arm’s reach, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ khādantassa upatiṭṭhati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she attends on him when he is eating fresh food, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannassa upatiṭṭhati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she attends on one who is not fully ordained, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not fully ordained, but she perceives him as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive him as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives something; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has someone else give something; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupasampannaṁ āṇāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asks someone who is not fully ordained to do it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
