<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc45_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittāgāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pleasure houses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">45. Adhikaraṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">45. The training rule on legal issues </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain nun went to the nun Thullanandā and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehāyye, imaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ vūpasamehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please come, Venerable, and resolve this legal issue.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā agreed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhū”ti paṭissuṇitvā, neva vūpasameti na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but then neither resolved it nor made any effort to do so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā bhikkhuniyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ehāyye, imaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ vūpasamehī’ti vuccamānā—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhū’ti paṭissuṇitvā, neva vūpasamessati na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ karissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">agree to resolve a legal issue, but then neither resolve it nor make any effort to do so?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā acted like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ehāyye, imaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ vūpasamehī’ti vuccamānā—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhū’ti paṭissuṇitvā, neva vūpasameti na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ karotī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ehāyye, imaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ vūpasamehī’ti vuccamānā—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sādhū’ti paṭissuṇitvā, neva vūpasamessati na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ karissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā—‘ehāyye, imaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ vūpasamehī’ti vuccamānā—‘sādhū’ti paṭissuṇitvā sā pacchā anantarāyikinī neva vūpasameyya na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ kareyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If, when asked by a nun, a nun consents to resolve a legal issue, but then neither resolves it nor makes any effort to resolve it, then, if there was no obstruction, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">By a nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāya bhikkhuniyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">by another nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhikaraṇaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri adhikaraṇāni— vivādādhikaraṇaṁ, anuvādādhikaraṇaṁ, āpattādhikaraṇaṁ, kiccādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of legal issues: legal issues arising from disputes, legal issues arising from accusations, legal issues arising from offenses, legal issues arising from business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ehāyye imaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ vūpasamehīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To resolve a legal issue: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ehāyye imaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ vinicchehi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to decide a legal issue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā pacchā anantarāyikinīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, if there was no obstruction: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asati antarāye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when there is no obstacle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva vūpasameyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Neither resolves it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sayaṁ vūpasameyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not resolve it herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ kareyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor makes any effort to resolve it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññaṁ āṇāpeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not ask anyone else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Neva vūpasamessāmi na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ karissāmī”ti dhuraṁ nikkhittamatte, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, thinking, “I’ll neither resolve it nor make any effort to resolve it,” then, by the mere fact of giving up her duty, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññā adhikaraṇaṁ neva vūpasameti na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and she perceives her as such, and she neither resolves the legal issue nor makes any effort to resolve it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematikā adhikaraṇaṁ neva vūpasameti, na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and she neither resolves the legal issue nor makes any effort to resolve it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññā adhikaraṇaṁ neva vūpasameti, na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she does not perceive her as such, and she neither resolves the legal issue nor makes any effort to resolve it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya adhikaraṇaṁ neva vūpasameti, na vūpasamāya ussukkaṁ karoti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she neither resolves the legal issue nor makes any effort to resolve it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she perceives her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati antarāye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is an obstacle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesitvā na labhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she searches, but is unable to find anyone to settle it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
