<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc21_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">21. Naggasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">21. The training rule on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhuniyo aciravatiyā nadiyā vesiyāhi saddhiṁ naggā ekatitthe nahāyanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a number of nuns were bathing naked at a ford in the river Aciravatī together with sex workers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vesiyā tā bhikkhuniyo uppaṇḍesuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sex workers teased the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ nu kho nāma tumhākaṁ, ayye, daharānaṁ brahmacariyaṁ ciṇṇena, nanu nāma kāmā paribhuñjitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, why practice the spiritual life when you’re still young? Why not enjoy worldly pleasures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā jiṇṇā bhavissatha tadā brahmacariyaṁ carissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You can practice the spiritual life when you’re old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ tumhākaṁ ubho atthā pariggahitā bhavissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way you’ll get the benefit of both.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo vesiyāhi uppaṇḍiyamānā maṅkū ahesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns felt humiliated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo upassayaṁ gantvā bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then went to the nuns’ dwelling place and told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tena hi, bhikkhave, bhikkhunīnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññapessāmi dasa atthavase paṭicca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, monks, I will lay down a training rule for the nuns for the following ten reasons: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghasuṭṭhutāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the well-being of the Sangha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vinayānuggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for supporting the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī naggā nahāyeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun bathes naked, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggā nahāyeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bathes naked: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anivatthā vā apārutā vā nahāyati, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she bathes without wearing a sarong or an upper robe, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nahānapariyosāne āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the end of the bath, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acchinnacīvarikāya vā naṭṭhacīvarikāya vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if her robes have been stolen or ruined; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
