<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc64_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gabbhinivagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pregnant women </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">64. Dutiyasikkhamānasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">64. The second training rule on trainee nuns </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhaṁ sikkhamānaṁ saṅghena asammataṁ vuṭṭhāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nuns were giving the full admission to trainee nuns who had trained in the six rules for two years, but who had not been approved by the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etha, sikkhamānā, imaṁ jānātha, imaṁ detha, imaṁ āharatha, iminā attho, imaṁ kappiyaṁ karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, trainee nuns, find out about this,” “Give this,” “Bring this,” “There’s need for this,” or “Make this allowable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But they replied, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na mayaṁ, ayye, sikkhamānā, bhikkhuniyo mayan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, we’re not trainee nuns. We’re nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhaṁ sikkhamānaṁ saṅghena asammataṁ vuṭṭhāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns give the full admission to trainee nuns who have trained for two years in the six rules, but who haven’t been approved by the Sangha?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhaṁ sikkhamānaṁ saṅghena asammataṁ vuṭṭhāpentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhaṁ sikkhamānaṁ saṅghena asammataṁ vuṭṭhāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vigarahitvā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and after criticizing them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhāya sikkhamānāya vuṭṭhānasammutiṁ dātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, approval is required for the full admission of a trainee nun who has trained for two years in the six rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And it should be given like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhāya sikkhamānāya saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā bhikkhunīnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha of nuns, that trainee nun should put her upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the nuns. She should then squat on her heels, raise her joined palms, and say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṁ, ayye, itthannāmā itthannāmāya ayyāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhā sikkhamānā saṅghaṁ vuṭṭhānasammutiṁ yācāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, I, the trainee nun so-and-so, who has trained for two years in the six rules under Venerable so-and-so, ask the Sangha for approval to be fully admitted.’</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she should ask a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable nun should then inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā itthannāmāya ayyāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhā sikkhamānā saṅghaṁ vuṭṭhānasammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This trainee nun so-and-so, who has trained under Venerable so-and-so for two years in the six rules, is asking the Sangha for approval to be fully admitted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhāya sikkhamānāya vuṭṭhānasammutiṁ dadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should give approval for the trainee nun so-and-so, who has trained for two years in the six rules, to be fully admitted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā itthannāmāya ayyāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhā sikkhamānā saṅghaṁ vuṭṭhānasammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This trainee nun so-and-so, who has trained under Venerable so-and-so for two years in the six rules, is asking the Sangha for approval to be fully admitted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhāya sikkhamānāya vuṭṭhānasammutiṁ deti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha gives approval for the trainee nun so-and-so, who has trained for two years in the six rules, to be fully admitted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassā ayyāya khamati itthannāmāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhāya sikkhamānāya vuṭṭhānasammutiyā dānaṁ, sā tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who approves of giving approval for the trainee nun so-and-so, who has trained for two years in the six rules, to be fully admitted should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā nakkhamati, sā bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dinnā saṅghena itthannāmāya dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhāya sikkhamānāya vuṭṭhānasammuti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has given approval for the trainee nun so-and-so, who has trained for two years in the six rules, to be fully admitted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tā bhikkhuniyo anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā dubbharatāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after criticizing those nuns in many ways, the Buddha spoke in dispraise of being difficult to support … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhaṁ sikkhamānaṁ saṅghena asammataṁ vuṭṭhāpeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun gives the full admission to a trainee nun who has trained in the six rules for two years, but who has not been approved by the Sangha, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve vassānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two years: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve saṁvaccharāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">two twelve-month periods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhitasikkhā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has trained: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has trained in the six rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asammatā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has not been approved: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñattidutiyena kammena vuṭṭhānasammuti na dinnā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">approval to be fully admitted has not been given though a legal procedure consisting of one motion and one announcement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives the full admission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampādeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gives the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vuṭṭhāpessāmī”ti gaṇaṁ vā ācariniṁ vā pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā pariyesati, sīmaṁ vā sammannati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, intending to give the full admission, she searches for a group, a teacher, a bowl, or a robe, or she establishes a monastic boundary, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi dukkaṭā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne upajjhāyāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, the preceptor commits an offense entailing confession, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇassa ca ācariniyā ca āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the group and the teacher commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, and she gives the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematikā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, and she gives the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as illegitimate, and she gives the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as legitimate, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhaṁ sikkhamānaṁ saṅghena sammataṁ vuṭṭhāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives the full admission to a trainee nun who has trained in the six rules for two years and who has been approved by the Sangha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
