<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc41_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittāgāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pleasure houses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">41. Rājāgārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">41. The training rule on royal houses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rañño pasenadissa kosalassa uyyāne cittāgāre paṭibhānacittaṁ kataṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">artwork had been installed in the pleasure house in King Pasenadi of Kosala’s park. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahū manussā cittāgāraṁ dassanāya gacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Many people visited the pleasure house, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyāpi bhikkhuniyo cittāgāraṁ dassanāya agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">as did the nuns from the group of six. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo cittāgāraṁ dassanāya gacchissanti, seyyathāpi gihiniyo kāmabhoginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns visit a pleasure house? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo cittāgāraṁ dassanāya gacchissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns from the group of six do this?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo cittāgāraṁ dassanāya gacchantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that those nuns did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo cittāgāraṁ dassanāya gacchissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns from the group of six do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī rājāgāraṁ vā cittāgāraṁ vā ārāmaṁ vā uyyānaṁ vā pokkharaṇiṁ vā dassanāya gaccheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun visits a royal house or a pleasure house or a park or a garden or a lotus pond, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājāgāraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A royal house: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha katthaci rañño kīḷituṁ ramituṁ kataṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever one has been built for a king to entertain and enjoy himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittāgāraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A pleasure house: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha katthaci manussānaṁ kīḷituṁ ramituṁ kataṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever one has been built for a people to entertain and enjoy themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A park: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha katthaci manussānaṁ kīḷituṁ ramituṁ kato hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever one has been made for a people to entertain and enjoy themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyānaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A garden: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha katthaci manussānaṁ kīḷituṁ ramituṁ kataṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever one has been made for a people to entertain and enjoy themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pokkharaṇī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lotus pond: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha katthaci manussānaṁ kīḷituṁ ramituṁ katā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever one has been made for a people to entertain and enjoy themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanāya gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is on her way to visit them, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhitā passati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever she stands to see them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vijahitvā punappunaṁ passati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Every time she moves outside the range of sight and then sees them again, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamekaṁ dassanāya gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is on her way to visit any one of them, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhitā passati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever she stands to see it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vijahitvā punappunaṁ passati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Every time she moves outside the range of sight and then sees it again, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāme ṭhitā passati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she sees it while remaining in a monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gacchantī vā āgacchantī vā passati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she sees it while coming or going; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati karaṇīye gantvā passati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she goes when there is something to be done and then sees it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
