<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc35_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuvaṭṭavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying down </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">35. Nikkaḍḍhanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">35. The training rule on throwing out </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhaddā kāpilānī sākete vassaṁ upagatā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Bhaddā Kāpilānī had entered the rainy-season residence at Sāketa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kenacideva karaṇīyena ubbāḷhā thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā santike dūtaṁ pāhesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But because she was disturbed by a certain matter, she sent a message to the nun Thullanandā: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace me ayyā thullanandā upassayaṁ dadeyya āgaccheyyāmahaṁ sāvatthin”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If you would give me a dwelling place, I would come to Sāvatthī.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā replied, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgacchatu, dassāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please come; I’ll give you one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhaddā kāpilānī sāketā sāvatthiṁ agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bhaddā Kāpilānī then traveled from Sāketa to Sāvatthī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī bhaddāya kāpilāniyā upassayaṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and Thullanandā gave her a dwelling place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī bahussutā hoti bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Thullanandā was a learned reciter, and she was confident and skilled at giving teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaddāpi kāpilānī bahussutā hoti bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ uḷārasambhāvitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bhaddā Kāpilānī, too, was a learned reciter who was confident and skilled at giving teachings, and she was respected for her excellence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyā bhaddā kāpilānī bahussutā bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ uḷārasambhāvitā”ti bhaddaṁ kāpilāniṁ paṭhamaṁ payirupāsitvā pacchā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ payirupāsanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of this, people visited Bhaddā Kāpilānī first and then Thullanandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī issāpakatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Overcome by jealousy, Thullanandā thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imā kira appicchā santuṭṭhā pavivittā asaṁsaṭṭhā yā imā saññattibahulā viññattibahulā viharantī”ti kupitā anattamanā bhaddaṁ kāpilāniṁ upassayā nikkaḍḍhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These ones, who are supposedly contented and have few desires, who are supposedly secluded and not socializing, are always persuading and convincing people.” And in anger she threw Bhaddā Kāpilānī out of that dwelling place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā ayyāya bhaddāya kāpilāniyā upassayaṁ datvā kupitā anattamanā nikkaḍḍhissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā give a dwelling place to Venerable Bhaddā Kāpilānī and then throw her out in anger?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhaddāya kāpilāniyā upassayaṁ datvā kupitā anattamanā nikkaḍḍhatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhaddāya kāpilāniyā upassayaṁ datvā kupitā anattamanā nikkaḍḍhissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā upassayaṁ datvā kupitā anattamanā nikkaḍḍheyya vā nikkaḍḍhāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun gives a dwelling place to a nun, and then, in anger, throws her out or has her thrown out, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To a nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāya bhikkhuniyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">To another nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upassayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A dwelling place: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kavāṭabaddho vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one that has a door is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Datvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ datvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she gives it herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kupitā anattamanāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">In anger: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anabhiraddhā āhatacittā khilajātā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">discontent, having hatred, hostile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikkaḍḍheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Throws out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gabbhe gahetvā pamukhaṁ nikkaḍḍhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she takes hold of her in a room and throws her out to the entryway, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamukhe gahetvā bahi nikkaḍḍhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she takes hold of her in the entryway and throws her outside, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekena payogena bahukepi dvāre atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even if she makes her go through many doors with a single effort, she commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikkaḍḍhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has thrown out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asks another, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇattā bahukepi dvāre atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she only asks once, then even if the other makes her go through many doors, she commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññā upassayaṁ datvā kupitā anattamanā nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and she perceives her as such, and she gives her a dwelling place, and she then throws her out in anger or has her thrown out, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematikā upassayaṁ datvā kupitā anattamanā nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and she gives her a dwelling place, and she then throws her out in anger or has her thrown out, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññā upassayaṁ datvā kupitā anattamanā nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she does not perceive her as such, and she gives her a dwelling place, and she then throws her out in anger or has her thrown out, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she throws out one of her requisites, or she has it thrown out, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akavāṭabaddhā nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she throws her out or has her thrown out from a dwelling place without a door, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she throws out one of her requisites from a dwelling place without a door, or she has it thrown out, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ kavāṭabaddhā vā akavāṭabaddhā vā nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she throws out one who is not fully ordained, or she has her thrown out, from a dwelling place with or without a door, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she throws out one of her requisites from that place, or she has it thrown out, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she perceives her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">alajjiniṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she throws out, or has thrown out, one who is shameless; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassā parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she throws out, or has thrown out, a requisite belonging to that person; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikaṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she throws out, or has thrown out, one who is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassā parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she throws out, or has thrown out, a requisite belonging to that person; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhaṇḍanakārikaṁ kalahakārikaṁ vivādakārikaṁ bhassakārikaṁ saṅghe adhikaraṇakārikaṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she throws out, or has thrown out, one who is quarrelsome and argumentative, and who creates legal issues in the Sangha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassā parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she throws out, or has thrown out, a requisite belonging to that person; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antevāsiniṁ vā saddhivihāriniṁ vā na sammā vattantiṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she throws out, or has thrown out, a pupil or student who is not conducting herself properly; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassā parikkhāraṁ nikkaḍḍhati vā nikkaḍḍhāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she throws out, or has thrown out, a requisite belonging to that person; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
