<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc75_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kumāribhūtavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on unmarried girls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">75. Paripuṇṇadvādasavassasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">75. The training rule on twelve years of seniority </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo paripuṇṇadvādasavassā saṅghena asammatā vuṭṭhāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time nuns who had twelve years of seniority were giving the full admission without being approved by the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā bālā honti abyattā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">They were ignorant and incompetent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jānanti kappiyaṁ vā akappiyaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they did not know what was allowable and what was not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhivihāriniyopi bālā honti abyattā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And their students too were ignorant and incompetent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jānanti kappiyaṁ vā akappiyaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they too did not know what was allowable and what was not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo paripuṇṇadvādasavassā saṅghena asammatā vuṭṭhāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns who have twelve years of seniority give the full admission without being approved by the Sangha?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo paripuṇṇadvādasavassā saṅghena asammatā vuṭṭhāpentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo paripuṇṇadvādasavassā saṅghena asammatā vuṭṭhāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vigarahitvā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and after criticizing them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, paripuṇṇadvādasavassāya bhikkhuniyā vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ dātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, approval is required for a nun who has twelve years of seniority to give the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the approval is to be given like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya paripuṇṇadvādasavassāya bhikkhuniyā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha of nuns, that nun who has twelve years of seniority should put her upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior nuns. She should then squat on her heels, raise her joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṁ, ayye, itthannāmā paripuṇṇadvādasavassā bhikkhunī saṅghaṁ vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ yācāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, I, the nun so-and-so who has twelve years of seniority, ask the Sangha for approval to give the full admission.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she should ask a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī saṅghena paricchinditabbā— ‘byattāyaṁ bhikkhunī lajjinī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha should then decide whether that nun is competent and has a sense of conscience. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace bālā ca hoti alajjinī ca, na dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is ignorant and shameless, approval should not be given. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace bālā hoti lajjinī, na dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is ignorant but has a sense of conscience, approval should not be given. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace byattā hoti alajjinī, na dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is competent but shameless, approval should not be given. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace byattā ca hoti lajjinī ca, dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is competent and has a sense of conscience, approval should be given. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And it is to be given like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable nun should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā paripuṇṇadvādasavassā bhikkhunī saṅghaṁ vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun so-and-so, who has twelve years of seniority, is asking the Sangha for approval to give the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmāya paripuṇṇadvādasavassāya bhikkhuniyā vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ dadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should give approval to nun so-and-so, who has twelve years of seniority, to give the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā paripuṇṇadvādasavassā bhikkhunī saṅghaṁ vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun so-and-so, who has twelve years of seniority, is asking the Sangha for approval to give the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmāya paripuṇṇadvādasavassāya bhikkhuniyā vuṭṭhāpanasammutiṁ deti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha gives approval to nun so-and-so, who has twelve years of seniority, to give the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassā ayyāya khamati itthannāmāya paripuṇṇadvādasavassāya bhikkhuniyā vuṭṭhāpanasammutiyā dānaṁ, sā tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who approves of giving approval to nun so-and-so, who has twelve years of seniority, to give the full admission should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā nakkhamati, sā bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dinnā saṅghena itthannāmāya paripuṇṇadvādasavassāya bhikkhuniyā vuṭṭhāpanasammuti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has given approval to nun so-and-so, who has twelve years of seniority, to give the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tā bhikkhuniyo anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā dubbharatāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after criticizing those nuns in many ways, the Buddha spoke in dispraise of being difficult to support … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī paripuṇṇadvādasavassā saṅghena asammatā vuṭṭhāpeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun who has twelve years of seniority gives the full admission without approval from the Sangha, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripuṇṇadvādasavassā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has twelve years of seniority: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pattadvādasavassā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has reached twelve years of seniority. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asammatā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without approval: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñattidutiyena kammena vuṭṭhāpanasammuti na dinnā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">approval to give the full admission has not been given though a legal procedure consisting of one motion and one announcement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives the full admission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampādeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gives the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vuṭṭhāpessāmī”ti gaṇaṁ vā ācariniṁ vā pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā pariyesati, sīmaṁ vā sammannati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, intending to give the full admission, she searches for a group, a teacher, a bowl, or a robe, or she establishes a monastic boundary, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi dukkaṭā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne upajjhāyāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, the preceptor commits an offense entailing confession, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇassa ca ācariniyā ca āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the group and the teacher commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, and she gives the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematikā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, and she gives the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as illegitimate, and she gives the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as legitimate, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paripuṇṇadvādasavassā saṅghena sammatā vuṭṭhāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has twelve years of seniority, has been approved by the Sangha, and then gives the full admission; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
