<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc96_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattupāhanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on sunshades and sandals </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">96. Asaṅkaccikasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">96. The training rule on not wearing a chest wrap </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī asaṅkaccikā gāmaṁ piṇḍāya pāvisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a nun had entered a village for almsfood without wearing her chest wrap. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā rathikāya vātamaṇḍalikā saṅghāṭiyo ukkhipiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">While she was walking along a street, a whirlwind lifted up her upper robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ukkuṭṭhiṁ akaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People shouted out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sundarā ayyāya thanudarā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“She has beautiful breasts and stomach!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī tehi manussehi uppaṇḍiyamānā maṅku ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because she was teased by those people, she felt humiliated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī upassayaṁ gantvā bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After returning to the nuns’ dwelling place, she told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī asaṅkaccikā gāmaṁ pavisissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun enter an inhabited area without wearing her chest wrap?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī asaṅkaccikā gāmaṁ pāvisī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī asaṅkaccikā gāmaṁ pavisissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī asaṅkaccikā gāmaṁ paviseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun enters an inhabited area without wearing her chest wrap, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṅkaccikāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without wearing her chest wrap: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vinā saṅkaccikaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">not wearing her chest wrap. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkaccikaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Chest wrap: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhakkhakaṁ ubbhanābhi, tassa paṭicchādanatthāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is for the purpose of concealing the body below the collar bone and above the navel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāmaṁ paviseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Enters an inhabited area: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parikkhittassa gāmassa parikkhepaṁ atikkāmentiyā āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she crosses the boundary of an enclosed inhabited area, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittassa gāmassa upacāraṁ okkamantiyā āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she enters the vicinity of an unenclosed inhabited area, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acchinnacīvarikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if her robe is stolen; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">naṭṭhacīvarikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if her robe is lost; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Terasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The thirteenth training rule is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattupāhanavaggo navamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ninth sub-chapter on sunshades and sandals is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā kho, ayyāyo, chasaṭṭhisatā pācittiyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, the one hundred and sixty-six rules on confession have been recited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyyāyo pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In regard to this I ask you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhetthāyyāyo, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You are pure in this and therefore silent. I will remember it thus.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khuddakaṁ samattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The section on minor rules has been completed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunivibhaṅge pācittiyakaṇḍaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The chapter on offenses entailing confession in the nuns’ analysis is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(…)</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
