<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc20_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattandhakāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the dark of the night </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">20. Rodanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">20. The training rule on crying </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ bhaṇḍitvā attānaṁ vadhitvā vadhitvā rodati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nun Caṇḍakāḷī quarreled with the nuns and then cried after repeatedly beating herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā caṇḍakāḷī attānaṁ vadhitvā vadhitvā rodissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Caṇḍakāḷī cry after repeatedly beating herself?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī attānaṁ vadhitvā vadhitvā rodatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Caṇḍakāḷī did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī attānaṁ vadhitvā vadhitvā rodissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Caṇḍakāḷī act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī attānaṁ vadhitvā vadhitvā rodeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun cries after repeatedly beating herself, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attānanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Herself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">oneself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vadhitvā vadhitvā rodati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she cries after repeatedly beating herself, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vadhati na rodati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she beats herself, but does not cry, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rodati na vadhati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she cries, but does not beat herself, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātibyasanena vā bhogabyasanena vā rogabyasanena vā phuṭṭhā rodati na vadhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she cries, but does not beat herself, because of loss of relatives, loss of property, or loss of health; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tenth training rule is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhakāravaggo dutiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second sub-chapter on darkness is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
