<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc10_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">10. Naccagītasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">10. The training rule on dancing and singing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rājagahe giraggasamajjo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time in Rājagaha there was a hilltop fair, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo giraggasamajjaṁ dassanāya agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns from the group of six went to see it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo naccampi gītampi vāditampi dassanāya gacchissanti, seyyathāpi gihiniyo kāmabhoginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns go to see dancing, singing, and music? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo naccampi gītampi vāditampi dassanāya gacchissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns from the group of six go to see dancing, singing, and music?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo naccampi gītampi vāditampi dassanāya gacchantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that those nuns did that?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo naccampi gītampi vāditampi dassanāya gacchissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns from the group do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī naccaṁ vā gītaṁ vā vāditaṁ vā dassanāya gaccheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun goes to see dancing or singing or music, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naccaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dancing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci naccaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any kind of dancing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gītaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Singing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci gītaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any kind of singing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāditaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Music: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci vāditaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any kind of music. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanāya gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is on her way to see it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhitā passati vā suṇāti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever she stands to see it or hear it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vijahitvā punappunaṁ passati vā suṇāti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Every time she moves beyond the range of sight and then sees it or hears it again, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamekaṁ dassanāya gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is on her way to see any one of the three, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhitā passati vā suṇāti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever she stands to see it or hear it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vijahitvā punappunaṁ passati vā suṇāti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Every time she moves beyond the range of sight and then sees it or hears it again, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāme ṭhitā passati vā suṇāti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she sees it or hears it while remaining in the monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuniyā ṭhitokāsaṁ vā nisinnokāsaṁ vā nipannokāsaṁ vā āgantvā naccanti vā gāyanti vā vādenti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the dancing, singing, or music comes to the place where the nun is standing, sitting, or lying down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭipathaṁ gacchantī passati vā suṇāti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she sees it or hears it while walking in the opposite direction; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati karaṇīye gantvā passati vā suṇāti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she goes there because there is something to be done and she then sees it or hears it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tenth training rule is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavaggo paṭhamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first sub-chapter on garlic is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
