<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc38_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuvaṭṭavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying down </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">38. Tiroraṭṭhasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">38. The training rule on outside their own country </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo tiroraṭṭhe sāsaṅkasammate sappaṭibhaye asatthikā cārikaṁ caranti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nuns went wandering without a group of travelers where it was considered risky and dangerous outside their own country. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhuttā dūsenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Scoundrels raped them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo tiroraṭṭhe sāsaṅkasammate sappaṭibhaye asatthikā cārikaṁ carissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns go wandering without a group of travelers where it’s considered risky and dangerous outside their own country?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo tiroraṭṭhe sāsaṅkasammate sappaṭibhaye asatthikā cārikaṁ carantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo tiroraṭṭhe sāsaṅkasammate sappaṭibhaye asatthikā cārikaṁ carissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī tiroraṭṭhe sāsaṅkasammate sappaṭibhaye asatthikā cārikaṁ careyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun goes wandering without a group of travelers where it is considered risky and dangerous outside her own country, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiroraṭṭheti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Outside her own country: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa vijite viharati, taṁ ṭhapetvā aññassa raṭṭhe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in any country apart from the one where she is living. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāsaṅkaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Risky: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ magge corānaṁ niviṭṭhokāso dissati, bhuttokāso dissati, ṭhitokāso dissati, nisinnokāso dissati, nipannokāso dissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a place has been seen along that road where criminals are camped, eating, standing, sitting, or lying down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappaṭibhayaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dangerous: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ magge corehi manussā hatā dissanti, viluttā dissanti, ākoṭitā dissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">criminals have been seen along that road, injuring, robbing, or beating people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asatthikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without a group of travelers: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vinā satthena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in the absence of a group of travelers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cārikaṁ careyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Goes wandering: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuṭasampāte gāme gāmantare gāmantare, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the villages are a chicken’s flight apart, then for every next village she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agāmake araññe addhayojane addhayojane āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it is an uninhabited area, a wilderness, then for every six kilometers she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthena saha gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she travels with a group; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kheme appaṭibhaye gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she travels where it is safe and free from danger; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
