<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Adhikaraṇasamatha - The settling of legal issues </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-as1-7_root-pli-ms.j. Adhikaraṇasamatha - The settling of legal issues </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho panāyyāyo satta adhikaraṇasamathā dhammā uddesaṁ āgacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerables, these seven principles for the settling of legal issues come up for recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannuppannānaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ samathāya vūpasamāya</span></p>
<p class="p3">“For the settling and resolving of legal issues whenever they arise there is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammukhāvinayo dātabbo,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Resolution face-to-face to be applied; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sativinayo dātabbo,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Resolution through recollection to be granted; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amūḷhavinayo dātabbo,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Resolution because of past insanity to be granted; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭiññāya kāretabbaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Acting according to what has been admitted; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyasikā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Majority decision; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassapāpiyasikā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Further penalty; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇavatthārakoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Covering over as if with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā kho, ayyāyo, satta adhikaraṇasamathā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerables, the seven principles for the settling of legal issues have been recited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyyāyo pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In regard to this I ask you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhetthāyyāyo, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You are pure in this and therefore silent. I will remember it thus.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhikaraṇasamathā niṭṭhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seven principles for the settling of legal issues are finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhaṁ kho, ayyāyo, nidānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, the introduction has been recited; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā aṭṭha pārājikā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the eight rules on expulsion have been recited; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā sattarasa saṅghādisesā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the seventeen rules on suspension have been recited; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā tiṁsa nissaggiyā pācittiyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the thirty rules on relinquishment and confession have been recited; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā chasaṭṭhisatā pācittiyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the one hundred and sixty-six rules on confession have been recited; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā aṭṭha pāṭidesanīyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the eight rules on acknowledgment have been recited; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā sekhiyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the rules to be trained in have been recited; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā satta adhikaraṇasamathā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the seven principles for the settling of legal issues have been recited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettakaṁ tassa bhagavato suttāgataṁ suttapariyāpannaṁ anvaddhamāsaṁ uddesaṁ āgacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This much has come down and is included in the Monastic Code of the Buddha and comes up for recitation every half-month. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha sabbāheva samaggāhi sammodamānāhi avivadamānāhi sikkhitabbanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In regard to this everyone should train in unity, in concord, without dispute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunivibhaṅgo niṭṭhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns’ rules and their analysis is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pācittiyapāḷi niṭṭhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The canonical text beginning with offenses entailing confession is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
