<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.111-111. Ajjhattikāyatanaparijānanasutta  - 111. Complete Understanding of the Interior </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.111. 111. Ajjhattikāyatanaparijānanasutta  - 111. Complete Understanding of the Interior </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Yogakkhemivagga  - 11. Sanctuary </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cakkhuṃ, bhikkhave, anabhijānaṃ aparijānaṃ avirājayaṃ appajahaṃ abhabbo dukkhakkhayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding the eye, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without directly knowing and completely understanding the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manaṃ anabhijānaṃ aparijānaṃ avirājayaṃ appajahaṃ abhabbo dukkhakkhayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuñca kho, bhikkhave, abhijānaṃ parijānaṃ virājayaṃ pajahaṃ bhabbo dukkhakkhayāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">By directly knowing and completely understanding the eye, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">By directly knowing and completely understanding the ear … nose … tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manaṃ abhijānaṃ parijānaṃ virājayaṃ pajahaṃ bhabbo dukkhakkhayāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
