<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.159-159. Bāhiraaniccanandikkhayasutta  - 159. Focus, the Exterior, and the End of Relishing </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.159. 159. Bāhiraaniccanandikkhayasutta  - 159. Focus, the Exterior, and the End of Relishing </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Nandikkhayavagga  - 16. The End of Relishing </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpe, bhikkhave, yoniso manasi karotha, rūpāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, properly attend to sights. Truly see the impermanence of sights. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpe, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yoniso manasikaronto, rūpāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassanto rūpesupi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant does this, they grow disillusioned with sights. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṃ suvimuttanti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sadde … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Properly attend to sounds … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gandhe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smells … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rase … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tastes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phoṭṭhabbe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhamme, bhikkhave, yoniso manasi karotha, dhammāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts. Truly see the impermanence of thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yoniso manasikaronto, dhammāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassanto dhammesupi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant does this, they grow disillusioned with thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When relishing ends, greed ends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When greed ends, relishing ends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṃ suvimuttanti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be well freed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
