<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.242-242. Dutiyadārukkhandhopamasutta  - 242. The Simile of the Tree Trunk (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.242. 242. Dutiyadārukkhandhopamasutta  - 242. The Simile of the Tree Trunk (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Āsīvisavagga  - 19. The Simile of the Vipers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kimilāyaṃ viharati gaṅgāya nadiyā tīre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kimibilā on the bank of the Ganges river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā mahantaṃ dārukkhandhaṃ gaṅgāya nadiyā sotena vuyhamānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing a large tree trunk being carried along by the current, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">he addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passatha no tumhe, bhikkhave, amuṃ mahantaṃ dārukkhandhaṃ gaṅgāya nadiyā sotena vuyhamānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, do you see that large tree trunk being carried along by the current of the Ganges river?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante” … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ vutte, āyasmā kimilo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, Venerable Kimbila said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu kho, bhante, orimaṃ tīraṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what’s the near shore and what’s the far shore? What’s sinking in the middle? What’s getting stranded on high ground? What’s getting taken by humans or non-humans? What’s getting caught up in a whirlpool? And what’s rotting away?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katamo ca, kimila, antopūtibhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what, Kimbila, is rotting away? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, kimila, bhikkhu aññataraṃ saṃkiliṭṭhaṃ āpattiṃ āpanno hoti yathārūpāya āpattiyā na vuṭṭhānaṃ paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has committed the kind of corrupt offense from which there is no rehabilitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, kimila, antopūtibhāvo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘rotting away’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
