<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.140-140. Ajjhattaaniccahetusutta  - 140. Interior and Cause Are Impermanent </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.140. 140. Ajjhattaaniccahetusutta  - 140. Interior and Cause Are Impermanent </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Devadahavagga  - 14. At Devadaha </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cakkhuṃ, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the eye is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo cakkhussa uppādāya, sopi anicco. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cause and condition that gives rise to the eye is also impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccasambhūtaṃ, bhikkhave, cakkhu kuto niccaṃ bhavissati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since the eye is produced by what is impermanent, how could it be permanent? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā aniccā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo jivhāya uppādāya sopi anicco. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccasambhūtā, bhikkhave, jivhā kuto niccā bhavissati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano anicco. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi, bhikkhave, hetu yopi paccayo manassa uppādāya, sopi anicco. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cause and condition that gives rise to the mind is also impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccasambhūto, bhikkhave, mano kuto nicco bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since the mind is produced by what is impermanent, how could it be permanent? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati … pe … jivhāyapi nibbindati … pe … manasmimpi nibbindati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
