<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.177-179-177–179. Bāhirāniccachandādisutta  - 177–179. Desire, Etc. for the Impermanent Exterior </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.177-179. 177–179. Bāhirāniccachandādisutta  - 177–179. Desire, Etc. for the Impermanent Exterior </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Saṭṭhipeyyālavagga  - 17. Sixty Abbreviated Texts </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ, tatra vo chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should give up desire … greed … desire and greed for what is impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is impermanent? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpā, bhikkhave, aniccā; tatra vo chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and thoughts are impermanent …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddā aniccā; tatra vo chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gandhā aniccā; tatra vo chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rasā aniccā; tatra vo chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phoṭṭhabbā aniccā; tatra vo chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammā aniccā; tatra vo chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ tatra vo chando pahātabbo, rāgo pahātabbo, chandarāgo pahātabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
