<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.247-247. Chappāṇakopamasutta  - 247. The Simile of Six Animals </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.247. 247. Chappāṇakopamasutta  - 247. The Simile of Six Animals </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Āsīvisavagga  - 19. The Simile of the Vipers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso arugatto pakkagatto saravanaṃ paviseyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose a person with wounded and festering limbs was to enter a thicket of thorny reeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kusakaṇṭakā ceva pāde vijjheyyuṃ, sarapattāni ca gattāni vilekheyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The kusa thorns would pierce their feet, and the reed leaves would scratch their limbs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, puriso bhiyyoso mattāya tatonidānaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvediyetha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that would cause that person to experience even more pain and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco bhikkhu gāmagato vā araññagato vā labhati vattāraṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, some mendicant goes to a village or a wilderness and gets scolded, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayañca so āyasmā evaṃkārī evaṃsamācāro asucigāmakaṇṭako’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This venerable, acting like this, behaving like this, is a filthy village thorn.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kaṇṭakoti iti viditvā saṃvaro ca asaṃvaro ca veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Understanding that they’re a thorn, they should understand restraint and lack of restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, asaṃvaro hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is someone unrestrained? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā piyarūpe rūpe adhimuccati, appiyarūpe rūpe byāpajjati, anupaṭṭhitakāyassati ca viharati parittacetaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart restricted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, yatthassa te uppannā pāpakā akusalā dhammā aparisesā nirujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear a sound with their ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they smell an odor with their nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they taste a flavor with their tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they feel a touch with their body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya piyarūpe dhamme adhimuccati, appiyarūpe dhamme byāpajjati, anupaṭṭhitakāyassati ca viharati parittacetaso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they know a thought with their mind, if it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and a limited heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, yatthassa te uppannā pāpakā akusalā dhammā aparisesā nirujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso chappāṇake gahetvā nānāvisaye nānāgocare daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a person was to catch six animals, with diverse territories and feeding grounds, and tie them up with a strong rope. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahiṃ gahetvā daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d catch a snake, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susumāraṃ gahetvā daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a crocodile, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pakkhiṃ gahetvā daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a bird, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kukkuraṃ gahetvā daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a dog, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siṅgālaṃ gahetvā daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a jackal, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Makkaṭaṃ gahetvā daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a monkey, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daḷhāya rajjuyā bandhitvā majjhe gaṇṭhiṃ karitvā ossajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">tie each up with a strong rope, then tie a knot in the middle and let them loose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, te, bhikkhave, chappāṇakā nānāvisayā nānāgocarā sakaṃ sakaṃ gocaravisayaṃ āviñcheyyuṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those six animals with diverse domains and territories would each pull towards their own domain and territory. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahi āviñcheyya ‘vammikaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti, susumāro āviñcheyya ‘udakaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti, pakkhī āviñcheyya ‘ākāsaṃ ḍessāmī’ti, kukkuro āviñcheyya ‘gāmaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti, siṅgālo āviñcheyya ‘sīvathikaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti, makkaṭo āviñcheyya ‘vanaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The snake would pull one way, thinking ‘I’m going into an anthill!’ The crocodile would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the water!’ The bird would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m flying into the sky!’ The dog would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the village!’ The jackal would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the charnel ground!’ The monkey would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the jungle!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā kho te, bhikkhave, chappāṇakā jhattā assu kilantā, atha kho yo nesaṃ pāṇakānaṃ balavataro assa tassa te anuvatteyyuṃ, anuvidhāyeyyuṃ vasaṃ gaccheyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When those six animals became exhausted and worn out, the strongest of them would get their way, and they’d all have to submit to their control. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yassa kassaci bhikkhuno kāyagatāsati abhāvitā abahulīkatā, taṃ cakkhu āviñchati manāpiyesu rūpesu, amanāpiyā rūpā paṭikūlā honti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when a mendicant has not developed or cultivated mindfulness of the body, their eye pulls towards pleasant sights, but is put off by unpleasant sights. Their ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano āviñchati manāpiyesu dhammesu, amanāpiyā dhammā paṭikūlā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind pulls towards pleasant thoughts, but is put off by unpleasant thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, asaṃvaro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how someone is unrestrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, saṃvaro hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is someone restrained? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā piyarūpe rūpe nādhimuccati, appiyarūpe rūpe na byāpajjati, upaṭṭhitakāyassati ca viharati appamāṇacetaso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, yatthassa te uppannā pāpakā akusalā dhammā aparisesā nirujjhanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They hear a sound … smell an odor … taste a flavor … feel a touch … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya piyarūpe dhamme nādhimuccati, appiyarūpe dhamme na byāpajjati, upaṭṭhitakāyassati ca viharati appamāṇacetaso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know a thought with their mind. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti yatthassa te uppannā pāpakā akusalā dhammā aparisesā nirujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso chappāṇake gahetvā nānāvisaye nānāgocare daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a person was to catch six animals, with diverse territories and feeding grounds, and tie them up with a strong rope. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahiṃ gahetvā daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d catch a snake, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susumāraṃ gahetvā daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a crocodile, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pakkhiṃ gahetvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a bird, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuraṃ gahetvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a dog, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siṅgālaṃ gahetvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">a jackal, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkaṭaṃ gahetvā daḷhāya rajjuyā bandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a monkey, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daḷhāya rajjuyā bandhitvā daḷhe khīle vā thambhe vā upanibandheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">tie each up with a strong rope, then tether them to a strong post or pillar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te, bhikkhave, chappāṇakā nānāvisayā nānāgocarā sakaṃ sakaṃ gocaravisayaṃ āviñcheyyuṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those six animals with diverse domains and territories would each pull towards their own domain and territory. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahi āviñcheyya ‘vammikaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti, susumāro āviñcheyya ‘udakaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti, pakkhī āviñcheyya ‘ākāsaṃ ḍessāmī’ti, kukkuro āviñcheyya ‘gāmaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti, siṅgālo āviñcheyya ‘sīvathikaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti, makkaṭo āviñcheyya ‘vanaṃ pavekkhāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The snake would pull one way, thinking ‘I’m going into an anthill!’ The crocodile would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the water!’ The bird would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m flying into the sky!’ The dog would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the village!’ The jackal would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the charnel ground!’ The monkey would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the jungle!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā kho te, bhikkhave, chappāṇakā jhattā assu kilantā, atha tameva khīlaṃ vā thambhaṃ vā upatiṭṭheyyuṃ, upanisīdeyyuṃ, upanipajjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When those six animals became exhausted and worn out, they’d stand or sit or lie down right by that post or pillar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yassa kassaci bhikkhuno kāyagatāsati bhāvitā bahulīkatā, taṃ cakkhu nāviñchati manāpiyesu rūpesu, amanāpiyā rūpā nappaṭikūlā honti … pe … jivhā nāviñchati manāpiyesu rasesu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, their eye doesn’t pull towards pleasant sights, and isn’t put off by unpleasant sights. Their ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano nāviñchati manāpiyesu dhammesu, amanāpiyā dhammā nappaṭikūlā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind doesn’t pull towards pleasant thoughts, and isn’t put off by unpleasant thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, saṃvaro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how someone is restrained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Daḷhe khīle vā thambhe vā’ti kho, bhikkhave, kāyagatāya satiyā etaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A strong post or pillar’ is a term for mindfulness of the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha vo, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kāyagatā no sati bhāvitā bhavissati bahulīkatā yānīkatā vatthukatā anuṭṭhitā paricitā susamāraddhā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will develop mindfulness of the body. We’ll cultivate it, make it our vehicle and our basis, keep it up, consolidate it, and properly implement it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi kho, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
