<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.128-128. Soṇasutta  - 128. With Soṇa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.128. 128. Soṇasutta  - 128. With Soṇa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gahapativagga  - 13. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho soṇo gahapatiputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho soṇo gahapatiputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Soṇa went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Yathā purimasuttantaṃ, evaṃ vitthāretabbaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(This should be told in full as in SN 35.118.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, soṇa, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
