<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.068-68. Samiddhilokapañhāsutta  - 68. Samiddhi’s Question About the World </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.068. 68. Samiddhilokapañhāsutta  - 68. Samiddhi’s Question About the World </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Migajālavagga  - 7. With Migajāla </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Loko, loko’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘the world’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, loko vā assa lokapaññatti vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do we define the world or what is known as the world?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yattha kho, samiddhi, atthi cakkhu, atthi rūpā, atthi cakkhuviññāṇaṃ, atthi cakkhuviññāṇaviññātabbā dhammā, atthi tattha loko vā lokapaññatti vāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Samiddhi, where there is the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and phenomena to be known by eye consciousness, there is the world or what is known as the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi jivhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where there is the ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi mano, atthi dhammā, atthi manoviññāṇaṃ, atthi manoviññāṇaviññātabbā dhammā, atthi tattha loko vā lokapaññatti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where there is the mind, thoughts, mind consciousness, and phenomena to be known by mind consciousness, there is the world or what is known as the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ca kho, samiddhi, natthi cakkhu, natthi rūpā, natthi cakkhuviññāṇaṃ, natthi cakkhuviññāṇaviññātabbā dhammā, natthi tattha loko vā lokapaññatti vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where there is no eye, no sights, no eye consciousness, and no phenomena to be known by eye consciousness, there is no world or what is known as the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi jivhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where there is no ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi mano, natthi dhammā, natthi manoviññāṇaṃ, natthi manoviññāṇaviññātabbā dhammā, natthi tattha loko vā lokapaññatti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where there is no mind, no thoughts, no mind consciousness, and no phenomena to be known by mind consciousness, there is no world or what is known as the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
