<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.155-155. Dhammakathikapucchasutta  - 155. A Dhamma Speaker </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.155. 155. Dhammakathikapucchasutta  - 155. A Dhamma Speaker </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Navapurāṇavagga  - 15. The Old and the New </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘dhammakathiko, dhammakathiko’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of a ‘Dhamma speaker’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, dhammakathiko hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a Dhamma speaker defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cakkhussa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya dhammaṃ deseti, ‘dhammakathiko bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding the eye, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who speaks on Dhamma’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhussa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti, ‘dhammānudhammappaṭipanno bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding the eye, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who practices in line with the teaching’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhussa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidā virāgā nirodhā anupādāvimutto hoti, ‘diṭṭhadhammanibbānappatto bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they’re freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding the eye, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya ce, bhikkhu, nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya dhammaṃ deseti, ‘dhammakathiko bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment with the ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manassa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya dhammaṃ deseti, ‘dhammakathiko bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind, for its fading away and cessation, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who speaks on Dhamma’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manassa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti, ‘dhammānudhammappaṭipanno bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding the mind, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who practices in line with the teaching’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manassa ce, bhikkhu, nibbidā virāgā nirodhā anupādāvimutto hoti, ‘diṭṭhadhammanibbānappatto bhikkhū’ti alaṃvacanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they’re freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding the mind, they’re qualified to be called a ‘mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navapurāṇavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammaṃ cattāri sappāyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anantevāsi kimatthiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi nu kho pariyāyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">indriyakathikena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saḷāyatanavagge tatiyapaṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yogakkhemi ca loko ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapati devadahena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navapurāṇena paṇṇāso, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyo tena vuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
