<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.125-125. Vajjīsutta  - 125. In the Land of the Vajjis </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.125. 125. Vajjīsutta  - 125. In the Land of the Vajjis </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gahapativagga  - 13. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vajjīsu viharati hatthigāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at the village of Hatthi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uggo gahapati hatthigāmako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho uggo gahapati hatthigāmako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Ugga of Hatthi went up to the Buddha, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana, bhante, hetu ko paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Yathā purimasuttantaṃ, evaṃ vitthāretabbaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(This should be told in full as in the previous discourse.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayaṃ kho, gahapati, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena m’idhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
