<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.104-104. Yogakkhemisutta  - 104. Sanctuary </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.104. 104. Yogakkhemisutta  - 104. Sanctuary </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Yogakkhemivagga  - 11. Sanctuary </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yogakkhemipariyāyaṃ vo, bhikkhave, dhammapariyāyaṃ desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching, an explanation of one who has reached sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, yogakkhemipariyāyo dhammapariyāyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is an exposition of the teaching, an explanation of one who has reached sanctuary? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesañca pahānāya akkhāsi yogaṃ, tasmā tathāgato ‘yogakkhemī’ti vuccati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches meditation for giving them up. That’s why the Realized One is called one who has reached sanctuary. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesañca pahānāya akkhāsi yogaṃ, tasmā tathāgato ‘yogakkhemī’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches meditation for giving them up. That’s why the Realized One is called one who has reached sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yogakkhemipariyāyo dhammapariyāyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is an exposition of the teaching, an explanation of one who has reached sanctuary.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
