<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.090-90. Paṭhamaejāsutta  - 90. Turbulence (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.090. 90. Paṭhamaejāsutta  - 90. Turbulence (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Channavagga  - 9. With Channa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ejā, bhikkhave, rogo, ejā gaṇḍo, ejā sallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, turbulence is a disease, turbulence is a boil, turbulence is a dart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, tathāgato anejo viharati vītasallo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the Realized One lives unperturbed, with dart drawn out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya ‘anejo vihareyyaṃ vītasallo’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, a mendicant might wish: ‘May I live unperturbed, with dart drawn out.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuṃ na maññeyya, cakkhusmiṃ na maññeyya, cakkhuto na maññeyya, cakkhu meti na maññeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">So let them not identify with the eye, let them not identify regarding the eye, let them not identify as the eye, let them not identify ‘the eye is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpe na maññeyya, rūpesu na maññeyya, rūpato na maññeyya, rūpā meti na maññeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify sights … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuviññāṇaṃ na maññeyya, cakkhuviññāṇasmiṃ na maññeyya, cakkhuviññāṇato na maññeyya, cakkhuviññāṇaṃ meti na maññeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhusamphassaṃ na maññeyya, cakkhusamphassasmiṃ na maññeyya, cakkhusamphassato na maññeyya, cakkhusamphasso meti na maññeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">eye contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṃ meti na maññeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify with the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact. Let them not identify regarding that, let them not identify as that, and let them not identify ‘that is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotaṃ na maññeyya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānaṃ na maññeyya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhaṃ na maññeyya, jivhāya na maññeyya, jivhāto na maññeyya, jivhā meti na maññeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rase na maññeyya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāviññāṇaṃ na maññeyya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāsamphassaṃ na maññeyya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ jivhāsamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṃ meti na maññeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyaṃ na maññeyya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manaṃ na maññeyya, manasmiṃ na maññeyya, manato na maññeyya, mano meti na maññeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhamme na maññeyya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manosamphassaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṃ meti na maññeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify with the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. Let them not identify regarding that, let them not identify as that, and let them not identify ‘that is mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaṃ na maññeyya, sabbasmiṃ na maññeyya, sabbato na maññeyya, sabbaṃ meti na maññeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let them not identify with all, let them not identify regarding all, let them not identify as all, let them not identify ‘all is mine’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ amaññamāno na kiñcipi loke upādiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not identifying, they don’t grasp at anything in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupādiyaṃ na paritassati. Aparitassaṃ paccattaññeva parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
