<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.135-135. Khaṇasutta  - 135. Opportunity </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.135. 135. Khaṇasutta  - 135. Opportunity </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Devadahavagga  - 14. At Devadaha </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lābhā vo, bhikkhave, suladdhaṃ vo, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re fortunate, mendicants, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khaṇo vo paṭiladdho brahmacariyavāsāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to have the opportunity to live the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhā mayā, bhikkhave, chaphassāyatanikā nāma nirayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen the hell called ‘the six fields of contact’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yaṃ kiñci cakkhunā rūpaṃ passati aniṭṭharūpaṃyeva passati, no iṭṭharūpaṃ; akantarūpaṃyeva passati, no kantarūpaṃ; amanāparūpaṃyeva passati, no manāparūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There, whatever sight you see with your eye is unlikable, not likable; undesirable, not desirable; unpleasant, not pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kiñci sotena saddaṃ suṇāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever sound you hear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever odor you smell … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci jivhāya rasaṃ sāyati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever flavor you taste … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever touch you feel … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci manasā dhammaṃ vijānāti aniṭṭharūpaṃyeva vijānāti, no iṭṭharūpaṃ; akantarūpaṃyeva vijānāti, no kantarūpaṃ; amanāparūpaṃyeva vijānāti, no manāparūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever thought you know with your mind is unlikable, not likable; undesirable, not desirable; unpleasant, not pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhā vo, bhikkhave, suladdhaṃ vo, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re fortunate, mendicants, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khaṇo vo paṭiladdho brahmacariyavāsāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to have the opportunity to live the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhā mayā, bhikkhave, chaphassāyatanikā nāma saggā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen the heaven called ‘the six fields of contact’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yaṃ kiñci cakkhunā rūpaṃ passati iṭṭharūpaṃyeva passati, no aniṭṭharūpaṃ; kantarūpaṃyeva passati, no akantarūpaṃ; manāparūpaṃyeva passati, no amanāparūpaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">There, whatever sight you see with your eye is likable, not unlikable; desirable, not undesirable; pleasant, not unpleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci jivhāya rasaṃ sāyati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever sound … odor … flavor … touch … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci manasā dhammaṃ vijānāti iṭṭharūpaṃyeva vijānāti, no aniṭṭharūpaṃ; kantarūpaṃyeva vijānāti, no akantarūpaṃ; manāparūpaṃyeva vijānāti, no amanāparūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever thought you know with your mind is likable, not unlikable; desirable, not undesirable; pleasant, not unpleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhā vo, bhikkhave, suladdhaṃ vo, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re fortunate, mendicants, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khaṇo vo paṭiladdho brahmacariyavāsāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to have the opportunity to live the spiritual life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
