<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.075-75. Dutiyagilānasutta  - 75. Sick (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.075. 75. Dutiyagilānasutta  - 75. Sick (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Gilānavagga  - 8. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu … pe … bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“amukasmiṃ, bhante, vihāre aññataro bhikkhu navo appaññāto ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, in such and such a monastery there’s a mendicant who is junior and not well-known. He’s sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhante, bhagavā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go to him out of compassion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā navavādañca sutvā gilānavādañca, “appaññāto bhikkhū”ti iti viditvā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha heard that the mendicant was junior and ill, understanding that he was not well-known, he went to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That mendicant saw the Buddha coming off in the distance </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and tried to rise on his cot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to that monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṃ, bhikkhu, mā tvaṃ mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s all right, mendicant, don’t get up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santimāni āsanāni paññattāni, tatthāhaṃ nisīdissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some seats spread out, I will sit there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdi bhagavā paññatte āsane. Nisajja kho bhagavā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He sat on the seat spread out and said to the mendicant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci te, bhikkhu, khamanīyaṃ, kacci yāpanīyaṃ, kacci dukkhā vedanā paṭikkamanti no abhikkamanti, paṭikkamosānaṃ paññāyati no abhikkamo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you’re keeping well, mendicant; I hope you’re alright. I hope that your pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ, na yāpanīyaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not alright. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kho maṃ, bhante, attā sīlato upavadatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No ce kira te, bhikkhu, attā sīlato upavadati, atha kiñca te kukkuccaṃ ko ca vippaṭisāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, mendicant, why do you have remorse and regret?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvāhaṃ, bhante, sīlavisuddhatthaṃ bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because I understand that the Buddha has not taught the Dhamma merely for the sake of ethical purity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No ce kira tvaṃ, bhikkhu, sīlavisuddhatthaṃ mayā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāsi, atha kimatthaṃ carahi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If that is so, what exactly do you understand to be the purpose of teaching the Dhamma?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anupādāparinibbānatthaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I understand that the Buddha has taught the Dhamma for the purpose of complete extinguishment by not grasping.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, mendicant! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, anupādāparinibbānatthaṃ mayā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good that you understand that I’ve taught the Dhamma for the purpose of complete extinguishment by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupādāparinibbānattho hi, bhikkhu, mayā dhammo desito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For that is indeed the purpose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, mendicant? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhu niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is the eye permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“… pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manoviññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manosamphasso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact: is that permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suffering, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and liable to fall apart, is it fit to be regarded thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhu, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye … ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasmimpi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manoviññāṇepi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manosamphassepi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tasmimpi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They grow disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamano so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, that mendicant was happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imasmiñca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne tassa bhikkhussa anupādāya āsavehi cittaṃ vimuccīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And while this discourse was being spoken, the mind of that mendicant was freed from defilements by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
