<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.122-122. Saṃyojaniyadhammasutta  - 122. Things Prone to Being Fettered </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.122. 122. Saṃyojaniyadhammasutta  - 122. Things Prone to Being Fettered </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Lokakāmaguṇavagga  - 12. The World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saṃyojaniye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi saṃyojanañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the things that are prone to being fettered, and the fetter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṃyojaniyā dhammā, katamañca saṃyojanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the things that are prone to being fettered? And what is the fetter? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṃyojaniyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that are prone to being fettered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo tattha chandarāgo, taṃ tattha saṃyojanaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The desire and greed for them is the fetter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṃyojaniyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that are prone to being fettered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo tattha chandarāgo taṃ tattha saṃyojanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The desire and greed for them is the fetter.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
