<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.241-241. Paṭhamadārukkhandhopamasutta  - 241. The Simile of the Tree Trunk (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.241. 241. Paṭhamadārukkhandhopamasutta  - 241. The Simile of the Tree Trunk (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Āsīvisavagga  - 19. The Simile of the Vipers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosambiyaṃ viharati gaṅgāya nadiyā tīre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambi on the bank of the Ganges river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā mahantaṃ dārukkhandhaṃ gaṅgāya nadiyā sotena vuyhamānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing a large tree trunk being carried along by the current, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">he addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passatha no tumhe, bhikkhave, amuṃ mahantaṃ dārukkhandhaṃ gaṅgāya nadiyā sotena vuyhamānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, do you see that large tree trunk being carried along by the current of the Ganges river?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace so, bhikkhave, dārukkhandho na orimaṃ tīraṃ upagacchati, na pārimaṃ tīraṃ upagacchati, na majjhe saṃsīdissati, na thale ussīdissati, na manussaggāho gahessati, na amanussaggāho gahessati, na āvaṭṭaggāho gahessati, na antopūti bhavissati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, assume that that tree trunk doesn’t collide with the near shore or the far shore, or sink in the middle, or get stranded on high ground. And assume that it doesn’t get taken by humans or non-humans or caught up in a whirlpool, and that it doesn’t rot away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañhi so, bhikkhave, dārukkhandho samuddaninno bhavissati samuddapoṇo samuddapabbhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In that case, that tree trunk will slant, slope, and incline towards the ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuddaninno, bhikkhave, gaṅgāya nadiyā soto samuddapoṇo samuddapabbhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because the current of the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines towards the ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, sace tumhepi na orimaṃ tīraṃ upagacchatha, na pārimaṃ tīraṃ upagacchatha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, assume that you don’t collide with the near shore or the far shore, or sink in the middle, or get stranded on high ground. And assume that you don’t get taken by humans or non-humans or caught up in a whirlpool, and that you don’t rot away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na majjhe saṃsīdissatha, na thale ussīdissatha, na manussaggāho gahessati, na amanussaggāho gahessati, na āvaṭṭaggāho gahessati, na antopūtī bhavissatha; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ tumhe, bhikkhave, nibbānaninnā bhavissatha nibbānapoṇā nibbānapabbhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In that case, you will slant, slope, and incline towards extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbānaninnā, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi nibbānapoṇā nibbānapabbhārā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because right view slants, slopes, and inclines towards extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu kho, bhante, orimaṃ tīraṃ, kiṃ pārimaṃ tīraṃ, ko majjhe saṃsādo, ko thale ussādo, ko manussaggāho, ko amanussaggāho, ko āvaṭṭaggāho, ko antopūtibhāvo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what’s the near shore and what’s the far shore? What’s sinking in the middle? What’s getting stranded on high ground? What’s getting taken by humans or non-humans? What’s getting caught up in a whirlpool? And what’s rotting away?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Orimaṃ tīran’ti kho, bhikkhu, channetaṃ ajjhattikānaṃ āyatanānaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘The near shore’, mendicant, is a term for the six interior sense fields. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Pārimaṃ tīran’ti kho, bhikkhu, channetaṃ bāhirānaṃ āyatanānaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The far shore’ is a term for the six exterior sense fields. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Majjhe saṃsādo’ti kho, bhikkhu, nandīrāgassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sinking in the middle’ is a term for desire with relishing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Thale ussādo’ti kho, bhikkhu, asmimānassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Stranded on high ground’ is a term for the conceit ‘I am’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhu, manussaggāho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s getting taken by humans? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhu, gihīhi saṃsaṭṭho viharati, sahanandī sahasokī, sukhitesu sukhito, dukkhitesu dukkhito, uppannesu kiccakaraṇīyesu attanā tesu yogaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone mixes closely with laypeople, sharing their joys and sorrows—happy when they’re happy and sad when they’re sad—and getting involved in their business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, manussaggāho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s called getting taken by humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhu, amanussaggāho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s getting taken by non-humans? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco aññataraṃ devanikāyaṃ paṇidhāya brahmacariyaṃ carati: ‘imināhaṃ sīlena vā vatena vā tapena vā brahmacariyena vā devo vā bhavissāmi devaññataro vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone lives the spiritual life wishing to be reborn in one of the orders of gods: ‘By this precept or observance or mortification or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, amanussaggāho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s called getting taken by non-humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Āvaṭṭaggāho’ti kho, bhikkhu, pañcannetaṃ kāmaguṇānaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Caught up in a whirlpool’ is a term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhu, antopūtibhāvo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s rotting away? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco dussīlo hoti pāpadhammo asucisaṅkassarasamācāro paṭicchannakammanto assamaṇo samaṇapaṭiñño abrahmacārī brahmacāripaṭiñño antopūti avassuto kasambujāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when some person is unethical, of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner—though claiming to be one—rotten inside, corrupt, and depraved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ‘antopūtibhāvo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘rotting away’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena nando gopālako bhagavato avidūre ṭhito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time Nanda the cowherd was sitting not far from the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho nando gopālako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṃ kho, bhante, na orimaṃ tīraṃ upagacchāmi, na pārimaṃ tīraṃ upagacchāmi, na majjhe saṃsīdissāmi, na thale ussīdissāmi, na maṃ manussaggāho gahessati, na amanussaggāho gahessati, na āvaṭṭaggāho gahessati, na antopūti bhavissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I won’t collide with the near shore or the far shore, or sink in the middle, or get stranded on high ground. And I won’t get taken by humans or non-humans or caught up in a whirlpool, and I won’t rot away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Labheyyāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavato santike pabbajjaṃ, labheyyaṃ upasampadan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi tvaṃ, nanda, sāmikānaṃ gāvo niyyātehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Nanda, return the cows to their owners.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gamissanti, bhante, gāvo vacchagiddhiniyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the cows will go back by themselves, since they love their calves.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Niyyāteheva tvaṃ, nanda, sāmikānaṃ gāvo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Still, Nanda, you should return them to their owners.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho nando gopālako sāmikānaṃ gāvo niyyātetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Nanda, after returning the cows to their owners, went up to the Buddha and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“niyyātitā, bhante, sāmikānaṃ gāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have returned the cows to their owners. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Labheyyāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavato santike pabbajjaṃ, labheyyaṃ upasampadan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alattha kho nando gopālako bhagavato santike pabbajjaṃ, alattha upasampadaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the cowherd Nanda received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acirūpasampanno ca panāyasmā nando eko vūpakaṭṭho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not long after his ordination, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññataro ca panāyasmā nando arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Nanda became one of the perfected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
