<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.060-60. Sabbupādānapariññāsutta  - 60. The Complete Understanding of All Grasping </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.060. 60. Sabbupādānapariññāsutta  - 60. The Complete Understanding of All Grasping </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Avijjāvagga  - 6. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sabbupādānapariññāya vo, bhikkhave, dhammaṃ desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sabbupādānapariññāya dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuñca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṃ. Tiṇṇaṃ saṅgati phasso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassapaccayā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contact is a condition for feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati, rūpesupi nibbindati, cakkhuviññāṇepi nibbindati, cakkhusamphassepi nibbindati, vedanāyapi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, and feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimokkhā ‘pariññātaṃ me upādānan’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they are released, they understand: ‘I have completely understood grasping.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotañca paṭicca sadde ca uppajjati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ear consciousness arises dependent on the ear and sounds. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānañca paṭicca gandhe ca … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nose consciousness arises dependent on the nose and smells. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhañca paṭicca rase ca … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tongue consciousness arises dependent on the tongue and tastes. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyañca paṭicca phoṭṭhabbe ca … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Body consciousness arises dependent on the body and touches. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manañca paṭicca dhamme ca uppajjati manoviññāṇaṃ. Tiṇṇaṃ saṅgati phasso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and thoughts. The meeting of the three is contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassapaccayā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contact is a condition for feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako manasmimpi nibbindati, dhammesupi nibbindati, manoviññāṇepi nibbindati, manosamphassepi nibbindati, vedanāyapi nibbindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the mind, thoughts, mind consciousness, mind contact, and feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimokkhā ‘pariññātaṃ me upādānan’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they are released, they understand: ‘I have completely understood grasping.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhave, sabbupādānapariññāya dhammo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
