<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.082-82. Lokapañhāsutta  - 82. A Question On the World </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.082. 82. Lokapañhāsutta  - 82. A Question On the World </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Gilānavagga  - 8. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha … and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Loko, loko’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘the world’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, lokoti vuccatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is the world defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Lujjatī’ti kho, bhikkhu, tasmā lokoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It wears away, mendicant, that’s why it’s called ‘the world’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca lujjati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is wearing away? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu kho, bhikkhu, lujjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye is wearing away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpā lujjanti, cakkhuviññāṇaṃ lujjati, cakkhusamphasso lujjati, yampidaṃ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi lujjati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights … eye consciousness … eye contact is wearing away. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also wearing away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā lujjati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano lujjati, dhammā lujjanti, manoviññāṇaṃ lujjati, manosamphasso lujjati, yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi lujjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind … thoughts … mind consciousness … mind contact is wearing away. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also wearing away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lujjatīti kho, bhikkhu, tasmā lokoti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It wears away, mendicant, that’s why it’s called ‘the world’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
