<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>35.229-229. Dutiyasamuddasutta  - 229. The Ocean (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">35.229. 229. Dutiyasamuddasutta  - 229. The Ocean (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Samuddavagga  - 18. The Ocean </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Samuddo, samuddo’ti, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano bhāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, an uneducated ordinary person speaks of the ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neso, bhikkhave, ariyassa vinaye samuddo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not the ocean in the training of the noble one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahā eso, bhikkhave, udakarāsi mahāudakaṇṇavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s just a large body of water, a large sea of water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyassa vinaye samuddo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the ocean in the training of the noble one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etthāyaṃ sadevako loko samārako sabrahmako sassamaṇabrāhmaṇī pajā sadevamanussā yebhuyyena samunnā tantākulakajātā kulagaṇṭhikajātā muñjapabbajabhūtā, apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ saṃsāraṃ nātivattati … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And it’s here that this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—is for the most part sunk. It’s become tangled like string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds, and it doesn’t escape the places of loss, the bad places, the underworld, transmigration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyassa vinaye samuddo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the ocean in the training of the noble one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etthāyaṃ sadevako loko samārako sabrahmako sassamaṇabrāhmaṇī pajā sadevamanussā yebhuyyena samunnā tantākulakajātā kulagaṇṭhikajātā muñjapabbajabhūtā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ saṃsāraṃ nātivattatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And it’s here that this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—is for the most part sunk. It’s become tangled like string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds, and it doesn’t escape the places of loss, the bad places, the underworld, transmigration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa rāgo ca doso ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have discarded </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjā ca virājitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">greed, hate, and ignorance </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ samuddaṃ sagāhaṃ sarakkhasaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">have crossed the ocean so hard to cross, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saūmibhayaṃ duttaraṃ accatari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with its sharks and monsters, its waves and dangers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgātigo maccujaho nirupadhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve got over clinging, given up death, and have no attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahāsi dukkhaṃ apunabbhavāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve given up suffering, so there are no more future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthaṅgato so na puneti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve come to an end, and cannot be measured; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amohayī maccurājanti brūmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they’ve confounded the King of Death, I say.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
