<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.18-18. Dutiyasambahulasutta  - 18. With Several Mendicants (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.18. 18. Dutiyasambahulasutta  - 18. With Several Mendicants (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rahogatavagga  - 2. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katamā nu kho, bhikkhave, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, what is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe …” </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three feelings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">pleasant, painful, and neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, vedanā … pe … phassasamudayā … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called feeling. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Yathā purimasuttante, tathā vitthāretabbo.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(This should be told in full as in the previous discourse.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
