<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.24-24. Pubbasutta  - 24. Before </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.24. 24. Pubbasutta  - 24. Before </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Aṭṭhasatapariyāyavagga  - 3. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbeva me, bhikkhave, sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘katamā nu kho vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā, katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tisso imā vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are these three feelings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">pleasant, painful, and neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā vuccanti vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling originates from contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is the practice that leads to the origin of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo vedanāya chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ. Idaṃ vedanāya nissaraṇan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for feeling: this is its escape.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
