<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.11-11. Rahogatasutta  - 11. In Private </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.11. 11. Rahogatasutta  - 11. In Private </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rahogatavagga  - 2. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha mayhaṃ, bhante, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just now, sir, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tisso vedanā vuttā bhagavatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has spoken of three feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā tisso vedanā vuttā bhagavatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three feelings the Buddha has spoken of. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuttaṃ kho panetaṃ bhagavatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha has also said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yaṃ kiñci vedayitaṃ taṃ dukkhasmin’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suffering includes whatever is felt.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ nu kho etaṃ bhagavatā sandhāya bhāsitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">What was the Buddha referring to when he said this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yaṃ kiñci vedayitaṃ taṃ dukkhasmin’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, mendicant! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tisso imā, bhikkhu, vedanā vuttā mayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have spoken of these three feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā tisso vedanā vuttā mayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three feelings I have spoken of. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuttaṃ kho panetaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I have also said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yaṃ kiñci vedayitaṃ, taṃ dukkhasmin’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suffering includes whatever is felt.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho panetaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhārānaṃyeva aniccataṃ sandhāya bhāsitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I said this I was referring to the impermanence of conditions, to the fact that conditions are </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yaṃ kiñci vedayitaṃ taṃ dukkhasmin’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho panetaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhārānaṃyeva khayadhammataṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">liable to end, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayadhammataṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">vanish, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">virāgadhammataṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">fade away, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirodhadhammataṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">cease, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vipariṇāmadhammataṃ sandhāya bhāsitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and perish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yaṃ kiñci vedayitaṃ taṃ dukkhasmin’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho pana, bhikkhu, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṃ nirodho akkhāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I have also explained the progressive cessation of conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vācā niruddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vitakkavicārā niruddhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa pīti niruddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the third absorption, rapture has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa assāsapassāsā niruddhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the fourth absorption, breathing has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samāpannassa rūpasaññā niruddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samāpannassa ākāsānañcāyatanasaññā niruddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samāpannassa viññāṇañcāyatanasaññā niruddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samāpannassa ākiñcaññāyatanasaññā niruddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca niruddhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo niruddho hoti, doso niruddho hoti, moho niruddho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhu, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṃ vūpasamo akkhāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I have also explained the progressive stilling of conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vācā vūpasantā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has stilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vitakkavicārā vūpasantā honti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have stilled. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca vūpasantā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have stilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo vūpasanto hoti, doso vūpasanto hoti, moho vūpasanto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have stilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayimā, bhikkhu, passaddhiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six levels of tranquility. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vācā paṭippassaddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vitakkavicārā paṭippassaddhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa pīti paṭippassaddhā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the third absorption, rapture has been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa assāsapassāsā paṭippassaddhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the fourth absorption, breathing has been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca paṭippassaddhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have been tranquilized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo paṭippassaddho hoti, doso paṭippassaddho hoti, moho paṭippassaddho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have been tranquilized.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
