<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.12-12. Paṭhamaākāsasutta  - 12. In the Sky (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.12. 12. Paṭhamaākāsasutta  - 12. In the Sky (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rahogatavagga  - 2. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ākāse vividhā vātā vāyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, various winds blow in the sky. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puratthimāpi vātā vāyanti, pacchimāpi vātā vāyanti, uttarāpi vātā vāyanti, dakkhiṇāpi vātā vāyanti, sarajāpi vātā vāyanti, arajāpi vātā vāyanti, sītāpi vātā vāyanti, uṇhāpi vātā vāyanti, parittāpi vātā vāyanti, adhimattāpi vātā vāyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Winds blow from the east, the west, the north, and the south. There are winds that are dusty and dustless, cool and warm, weak and strong. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, imasmiṃ kāyasmiṃ vividhā vedanā uppajjanti, sukhāpi vedanā uppajjati, dukkhāpi vedanā uppajjati, adukkhamasukhāpi vedanā uppajjatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, various feelings arise in this body: pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāpi vātā ākāse, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are many and various </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāyanti vividhā puthū; </span></p>
<p class="p3">winds that blow in the sky. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puratthimā pacchimā cāpi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">From the east they come, also the west, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uttarā atha dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the north, and then the south. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sarajā arajā capi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are dusty and dustless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sītā uṇhā ca ekadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">cool and sometimes warm, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhimattā parittā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">strong and weak; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puthū vāyanti mālutā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">these are the different breezes that blow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathevimasmiṃ kāyasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So too, in this body </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samuppajjanti vedanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings arise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhadukkhasamuppatti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">pleasant and painful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adukkhamasukhā ca yā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and those that are neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca bhikkhu ātāpī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when a mendicant is keen, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sampajaññaṃ na riñcati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not neglecting situational awareness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato so vedanā sabbā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that astute person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parijānāti paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">understands all feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vedanā pariññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Completely understanding feelings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe dhamme anāsavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re without defilements in this very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyassa bhedā dhammaṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That knowledge-master is grounded in the teaching; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhyaṃ nopeti vedagū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when their body breaks up, they can’t be reckoned.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
