<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.10-10. Phassamūlakasutta  - 10. Rooted in Contact </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.10. 10. Phassamūlakasutta  - 10. Rooted in Contact </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sagāthāvagga  - 1. With Verses </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā phassajā phassamūlakā phassanidānā phassapaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these three feelings are born, rooted, sourced, and conditioned by contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā, yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā sukhā vedanā, sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as pleasant, the corresponding pleasant feeling ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva dukkhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā, yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ dukkhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā dukkhā vedanā, sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as painful, the corresponding painful feeling ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhave, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva adukkhamasukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā, yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā adukkhamasukhā vedanā, sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ kaṭṭhānaṃ saṅghaṭṭanasamodhānā usmā jāyati, tejo abhinibbattati. Tesaṃyeva kaṭṭhānaṃ nānābhāvā vinikkhepā, yā tajjā usmā, sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any corresponding heat ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, imā tisso vedanā phassajā phassamūlakā phassanidānā phassapaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, these three feelings are born, rooted, sourced, and conditioned by contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tajjaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca tajjā vedanā uppajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The appropriate feeling arises dependent on the corresponding contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tajjassa phassassa nirodhā tajjā vedanā nirujjhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the corresponding contact ceases, the appropriate feeling ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāsaṃyuttassa sagāthāvaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhi sukhaṃ pahānena, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pātālaṃ daṭṭhabbena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sallena ceva gelaññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anicca phassamūlakāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
