<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.31-31. Nirāmisasutta  - 31. Spiritual </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.31. 31. Nirāmisasutta  - 31. Spiritual </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Aṭṭhasatapariyāyavagga  - 3. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, bhikkhave, sāmisā pīti, atthi nirāmisā pīti, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisatarā pīti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there is material rapture, spiritual rapture, and even more spiritual rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi sāmisaṃ sukhaṃ, atthi nirāmisaṃ sukhaṃ, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisataraṃ sukhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is material pleasure, spiritual pleasure, and even more spiritual pleasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi sāmisā upekkhā, atthi nirāmisā upekkhā, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisatarā upekkhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is material equanimity, spiritual equanimity, and even more spiritual equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi sāmiso vimokkho, atthi nirāmiso vimokkho, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisataro vimokkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is material liberation, spiritual liberation, and even more spiritual liberation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sāmisā pīti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is material rapture? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds … Smells … Tastes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati pīti, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmisā pīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The rapture that arises from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is called material rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā pīti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is spiritual rapture? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā pīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called spiritual rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā pīti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is even more spiritual rapture? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato uppajjati pīti, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā pīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant who has ended the defilements reviews their mind free from greed, hate, and delusion, rapture arises. This is called even more spiritual rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, sāmisaṃ sukhaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is material pleasure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds … Smells … Tastes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ, idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmisaṃ sukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasure and happiness that arise from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is called material pleasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, nirāmisaṃ sukhaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is spiritual pleasure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca viharati sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṃvedeti, yaṃ taṃ ariyā ācikkhanti: ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisaṃ sukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called spiritual pleasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataraṃ sukhaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is even more spiritual pleasure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ, idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataraṃ sukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant who has ended the defilements reviews their mind free from greed, hate, and delusion, pleasure and happiness arises. This is called even more spiritual pleasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sāmisā upekkhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is material equanimity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds … Smells … Tastes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati upekkhā, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmisā upekkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The equanimity that arises from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is called material equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā upekkhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is spiritual equanimity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā, dukkhassa ca pahānā, pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā, adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā upekkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called spiritual equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā upekkhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is even more spiritual equanimity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato uppajjati upekkhā, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā upekkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant who has ended the defilements reviews their mind free from greed, hate, and delusion, equanimity arises. This is called even more spiritual equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sāmiso vimokkho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is material liberation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpappaṭisaṃyutto vimokkho sāmiso vimokkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Liberation connected with form is material. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, nirāmiso vimokkho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is spiritual liberation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpappaṭisaṃyutto vimokkho nirāmiso vimokkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Liberation connected with the formless is spiritual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataro vimokkho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is even more spiritual liberation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato uppajjati vimokkho, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataro vimokkho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant who has ended the defilements reviews their mind free from greed, hate, and delusion, liberation arises. This is called even more spiritual liberation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhasatapariyāyavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīvakaaṭṭhasataṃ bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbe ñāṇañca bhikkhunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇabrāhmaṇā tīṇi, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhikañca nirāmisanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāsaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on feeling are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
