<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>36.05-5. Daṭṭhabbasutta  - 5. Should Be Seen </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">36.05. 5. Daṭṭhabbasutta  - 5. Should Be Seen </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sagāthāvagga  - 1. With Verses </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhā, bhikkhave, vedanā dukkhato daṭṭhabbā, dukkhā vedanā sallato daṭṭhabbā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā aniccato daṭṭhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant feeling should be seen as suffering. Painful feeling should be seen as a dart. Neutral feeling should be seen as impermanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno sukhā vedanā dukkhato diṭṭhā hoti, dukkhā vedanā sallato diṭṭhā hoti, adukkhamasukhā vedanā aniccato diṭṭhā hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has seen these three feelings in this way, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ‘bhikkhu sammaddaso acchecchi taṇhaṃ, vivattayi saṃyojanaṃ, sammā mānābhisamayā antamakāsi dukkhassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called a mendicant who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sukhaṃ dukkhato adda, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who sees pleasure as pain, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhamaddakkhi sallato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and suffering as a dart, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adukkhamasukhaṃ santaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that peaceful, neutral feeling </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">addakkhi naṃ aniccato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as impermanent </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve sammaddaso bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sees rightly; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parijānāti vedanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they completely understand feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vedanā pariññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Completely understanding feelings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhe dhamme anāsavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re without defilements in this very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyassa bhedā dhammaṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That knowledge-master is grounded in the teaching; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhyaṃ nopeti vedagū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when their body breaks up, they can’t be reckoned.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
