<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>37.04-4. Tīhidhammehisutta  - 4. Three Qualities </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">37.04. 4. Tīhidhammehisutta  - 4. Three Qualities </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamapeyyālavagga  - 1. Abbreviated Texts </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo yebhuyyena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when females have three qualities, when their body breaks up, after death, they are mostly reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo pubbaṇhasamayaṃ maccheramalapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A female lives at home with a heart full of the stain of stinginess in the morning, jealousy in the afternoon, and sexual desire in the evening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majjhanhikasamayaṃ issāpariyuṭṭhitena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāyanhasamayaṃ kāmarāgapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo yebhuyyena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When females have these three qualities, when their body breaks up, after death, they are mostly reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">() </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
