<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>37.30-30. Nāsentisutta  - 30. They Send Her Away </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">37.30. 30. Nāsentisutta  - 30. They Send Her Away </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Balavagga  - 3. Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa balāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five powers of a female. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpabalaṃ, bhogabalaṃ, ñātibalaṃ, puttabalaṃ, sīlabalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca sīlabalena, nāsenteva naṃ, kule na vāsenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a female has the power of attractiveness but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, na ca sīlabalena, nāsenteva naṃ, kule na vāsenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a female has the powers of attractiveness and wealth but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, ñātibalena ca, na ca sīlabalena, nāsenteva naṃ, kule na vāsenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a female has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, and relatives, but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, ñātibalena ca, puttabalena ca, na ca sīlabalena, nāsenteva naṃ, kule na vāsenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a female has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, and children, but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca rūpabalena, vāsenteva naṃ, kule na nāsenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of attractiveness, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca bhogabalena, vāsenteva naṃ, kule na nāsenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of wealth, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca ñātibalena, vāsenteva naṃ, kule na nāsenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of relatives, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca puttabalena, vāsenteva naṃ, kule na nāsenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of children, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca mātugāmassa balānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five powers of a female.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
