<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>37.34-34. Vaḍḍhīsutta  - 34. Growth </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">37.34. 34. Vaḍḍhīsutta  - 34. Growth </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Balavagga  - 3. Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhamānā ariyasāvikā ariyāya vaḍḍhiyā vaḍḍhati sārādāyinī ca hoti varādāyinī ca kāyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a female noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhāya vaḍḍhati, sīlena vaḍḍhati, sutena vaḍḍhati, cāgena vaḍḍhati, paññāya vaḍḍhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhamānā ariyasāvikā ariyāya vaḍḍhiyā vaḍḍhati, sārādāyinī ca hoti, varādāyinī ca kāyassāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A female noble disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhāya sīlena ca yādha vaḍḍhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When she grows in faith and ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññāya cāgena sutena cūbhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wisdom, and both generosity and learning—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tādisī sīlavatī upāsikā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a virtuous laywoman such as she </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādīyati sāramidheva attano”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">takes on what is essential for herself in this life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Balavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visāradā pasayha abhibhuyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ aṅgena pañcamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāsenti hetu ṭhānañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visārado vaḍḍhinā dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on females are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
