<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>39.16-16. Dukkarasutta  - 16. Hard to Do </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">39.16. 16. Dukkarasutta  - 16. Hard to Do </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sāmaṇḍakavagga  - 1. With Sāmaṇḍaka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, imasmiṃ dhammavinaye dukkaran”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, in this teaching and training, what is hard to do?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pabbajjā kho, āvuso, imasmiṃ dhammavinaye dukkarā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Going forth, reverend, is hard to do in this teaching and training.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pabbajitena panāvuso, kiṃ dukkaran”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s hard to do for someone who has gone forth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pabbajitena kho, āvuso, abhirati dukkarā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When you’ve gone forth it’s hard to be satisfied.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhiratena panāvuso, kiṃ dukkaran”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s hard to do for someone who is satisfied?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhiratena kho, āvuso, dhammānudhammappaṭipatti dukkarā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When you’re satisfied, it’s hard to practice in line with the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kīvaciraṃ panāvuso, dhammānudhammappaṭipanno bhikkhu arahaṃ assā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if a mendicant practices in line with the teaching, will it take them long to become a perfected one?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Naciraṃ, āvuso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Not long, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Soḷasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Purimakasadisaṃ uddānaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmaṇḍakasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses with Sāmaṇḍaka are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
