<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>40.06-6. Viññāṇañcāyatanapañhāsutta  - 6. A Question About the Dimension of Infinite Consciousness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">40.06. 6. Viññāṇañcāyatanapañhāsutta  - 6. A Question About the Dimension of Infinite Consciousness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Moggallānavagga  - 1. By Moggallāna </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ, viññāṇañcāyatanan’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They speak of this thing called the ‘dimension of infinite consciousness’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho viññāṇañcāyatananti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the dimension of infinite consciousness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idha bhikkhu sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma anantaṃ viññāṇanti viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that “consciousness is infinite”, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati viññāṇañcāyatanan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the dimension of infinite consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma anantaṃ viññāṇanti viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so … I was entering and remaining in the dimension of infinite consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, iminā vihārena viharato ākāsānañcāyatanasahagatā saññāmanasikārā samudācaranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While I was in that meditation, perceptions and attentions accompanied by the dimension of infinite space beset me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho maṃ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘moggallāna, moggallāna. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā, brāhmaṇa, viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ pamādo, viññāṇañcāyatane cittaṃ saṇṭhapehi, viññāṇañcāyatane cittaṃ ekodiṃ karohi, viññāṇañcāyatane cittaṃ samādahā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t neglect the dimension of infinite consciousness, brahmin! Settle your mind in the dimension of infinite consciousness; unify your mind and immerse it in the dimension of infinite consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, aparena samayena sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma anantaṃ viññāṇanti viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja vihāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, after some time … I entered and remained in the dimension of infinite consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi taṃ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya … pe … mahābhiññataṃ patto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So if anyone should be rightly called a disciple who attained to great direct knowledge with help from the Teacher, it’s me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
