<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>40.08-8. Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanapañhāsutta  - 8. A Question About the Dimension of Neither Perception Nor Non-Perception </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">40.08. 8. Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanapañhāsutta  - 8. A Question About the Dimension of Neither Perception Nor Non-Perception </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Moggallānavagga  - 1. By Moggallāna </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanan’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They speak of this thing called the ‘dimension of neither perception nor non-perception’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho nevasaññānāsaññāyatananti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idha bhikkhu sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati nevasaññānāsaññāyatanan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so … I was entering and remaining in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, iminā vihārena viharato ākiñcaññāyatanasahagatā saññāmanasikārā samudācaranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While I was in that meditation, perceptions and attentions accompanied by the dimension of nothingness beset me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho maṃ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘moggallāna, moggallāna. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā, brāhmaṇa, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ pamādo, nevasaññānāsaññāyatane cittaṃ saṇṭhapehi, nevasaññānāsaññāyatane cittaṃ ekodiṃ karohi, nevasaññānāsaññāyatane cittaṃ samādahā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t neglect the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, brahmin! Settle your mind in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception; unify your mind and immerse it in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, aparena samayena sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja vihāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, after some time … I entered and remained in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi taṃ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya … pe … mahābhiññataṃ patto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So if anyone should be rightly called a disciple who attained to great direct knowledge with help from the Teacher, it’s me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
