<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>40.04-4. Catutthajhānapañhāsutta  - 4. A Question About the Fourth Absorption </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">40.04. 4. Catutthajhānapañhāsutta  - 4. A Question About the Fourth Absorption </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Moggallānavagga  - 1. By Moggallāna </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Catutthaṃ jhānaṃ, catutthaṃ jhānan’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They speak of this thing called the ‘fourth absorption’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho catutthaṃ jhānanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the fourth absorption? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idha bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati catutthaṃ jhānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the fourth absorption.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so … I was entering and remaining in the fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, iminā vihārena viharato sukhasahagatā saññāmanasikārā samudācaranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While I was in that meditation, perceptions and attentions accompanied by pleasure beset me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho maṃ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘moggallāna, moggallāna. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā, brāhmaṇa, catutthaṃ jhānaṃ pamādo, catutthe jhāne cittaṃ saṇṭhapehi, catutthe jhāne cittaṃ ekodiṃ karohi, catutthe jhāne cittaṃ samādahā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t neglect the fourth absorption, brahmin! Settle your mind in the fourth absorption; unify your mind and immerse it in the fourth absorption.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, aparena samayena sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja vihāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, after some time … I entered and remained in the fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi taṃ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya … pe … mahābhiññataṃ patto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So if anyone should be rightly called a disciple who attained to great direct knowledge with help from the Teacher, it’s me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
