<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>41.02-2. Paṭhamaisidattasutta  - 2. Isidatta (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">41.02. 2. Paṭhamaisidattasutta  - 2. Isidatta (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cittavagga  - 1. With Citta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ sambahulā therā bhikkhū macchikāsaṇḍe viharanti ambāṭakavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yena therā bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā there bhikkhū abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho citto gahapati there bhikkhū etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta the householder went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“adhivāsentu me, bhante, therā svātanāya bhattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sirs, may the senior mendicants please accept my offering of tomorrow’s meal.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesuṃ kho therā bhikkhū tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati therānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ adhivāsanaṃ viditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā there bhikkhū abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that the senior mendicants had consented, Citta got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled them, keeping them on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho therā bhikkhū tassā rattiyā accayena pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena cittassa gahapatissa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then when the night had passed, the senior mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, went to Citta’s home, and sat down on the seats spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yena therā bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā there bhikkhū abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho citto gahapati āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and asked the senior venerable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘dhātunānattaṃ, dhātunānattan’ti, bhante thera, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘the diversity of elements’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, dhātunānattaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In what way did the Buddha speak of the diversity of elements?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā thero tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the senior venerable kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho citto gahapati āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘dhātunānattaṃ, dhātunānattan’ti, bhante thera, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, dhātunānattaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho āyasmā thero tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho citto gahapati āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time, Citta asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘dhātunānattaṃ, dhātunānattan’ti, bhante thera, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘the diversity of elements’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, dhātunānattaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In what way did the Buddha speak of the diversity of elements?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho āyasmā thero tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a second time and a third time the senior venerable kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā isidatto tasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe sabbanavako hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Isidatta was the most junior mendicant in that Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā isidatto āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He said to the senior venerable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“byākaromahaṃ, bhante thera, cittassa gahapatino etaṃ pañhan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may I answer Citta’s question?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Byākarohi tvaṃ, āvuso isidatta, cittassa gahapatino etaṃ pañhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Answer it, Reverend Isidatta.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañhi tvaṃ, gahapati, pucchasi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, is this your question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘dhātunānattaṃ, dhātunānattanti, bhante thera, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They speak of “the diversity of elements”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, dhātunānattaṃ, vuttaṃ bhagavatā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In what way did the Buddha speak of the diversity of elements?’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idaṃ kho, gahapati, dhātunānattaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is the diversity of elements spoken of by the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhudhātu, rūpadhātu, cakkhuviññāṇadhātu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye element, the sights element, the eye consciousness element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manodhātu, dhammadhātu, manoviññāṇadhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind element, the thought element, the mind consciousness element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, gahapati, dhātunānattaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how the Buddha spoke of the diversity of elements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati āyasmato isidattassa bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā there bhikkhū paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappesi sampavāresi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta, having approved and agreed with what Isidatta said, served and satisfied the senior mendicants with his own hands with a variety of delicious foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho therā bhikkhū bhuttāvino onītapattapāṇino uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the senior mendicants had eaten and washed their hands and bowls, they got up from their seats and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā thero āyasmantaṃ isidattaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the senior venerable said to Venerable Isidatta, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu kho taṃ, āvuso isidatta, eso pañho paṭibhāsi, neso pañho maṃ paṭibhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Isidatta, it’s good that you felt inspired to answer that question, because I didn’t. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tenahāvuso isidatta, yadā aññathāpi evarūpo pañho āgaccheyya, taññevettha paṭibhāseyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So when a similar question comes up, you should also answer it as you feel inspired.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
