<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>41.06-6. Dutiyakāmabhūsutta  - 6. With Kāmabhū (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">41.06. 6. Dutiyakāmabhūsutta  - 6. With Kāmabhū (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cittavagga  - 1. With Citta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā kāmabhū macchikāsaṇḍe viharati ambāṭakavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Kāmabhū was staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yenāyasmā kāmabhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho citto gahapati āyasmantaṃ kāmabhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta the householder went up to Venerable Kāmabhū, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kati nu kho, bhante, saṅkhārā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how many processes are there?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayo kho, gahapati, saṅkhārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, there are three processes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyasaṅkhāro, vacīsaṅkhāro, cittasaṅkhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Physical, verbal, and mental processes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho citto gahapati āyasmato kāmabhussa bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā āyasmantaṃ kāmabhuṃ uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” Citta approved and agreed with what Kāmabhū said. Then he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katamo pana, bhante, kāyasaṅkhāro, katamo vacīsaṅkhāro, katamo cittasaṅkhāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what is the physical process? What’s the verbal process? What’s the mental process?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Assāsapassāsā kho, gahapati, kāyasaṅkhāro, vitakkavicārā vacīsaṅkhāro, saññā ca vedanā ca cittasaṅkhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Breathing is a physical process. Placing the mind and keeping it connected are verbal processes. Perception and feeling are mental processes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho citto gahapati … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kasmā pana, bhante, assāsapassāsā kāyasaṅkhāro, kasmā vitakkavicārā vacīsaṅkhāro, kasmā saññā ca vedanā ca cittasaṅkhāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, why is breathing a physical process? Why are placing the mind and keeping it connected verbal processes? Why are perception and feeling mental processes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Assāsapassāsā kho, gahapati, kāyikā. Ete dhammā kāyappaṭibaddhā, tasmā assāsapassāsā kāyasaṅkhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Breathing is physical. It’s tied up with the body, that’s why breathing is a physical process. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe kho, gahapati, vitakketvā vicāretvā pacchā vācaṃ bhindati, tasmā vitakkavicārā vacīsaṅkhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">First you place the mind and keep it connected, then you break into speech. That’s why placing the mind and keeping it connected are verbal processes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññā ca vedanā ca cetasikā. Ete dhammā cittappaṭibaddhā, tasmā saññā ca vedanā ca cittasaṅkhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perception and feeling are mental. They’re tied up with the mind, that’s why perception and feeling are mental processes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ pana, bhante, saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpatti hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how does someone attain the cessation of perception and feeling?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, gahapati, saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpajjantassa bhikkhuno evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A mendicant who is entering such an attainment does not think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpajjissan’ti vā ‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpanno’ti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I will enter the cessation of perception and feeling’ or ‘I am entering the cessation of perception and feeling’ or ‘I have entered the cessation of perception and feeling.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha khvassa pubbeva tathā cittaṃ bhāvitaṃ hoti yaṃ taṃ tathattāya upanetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, their mind has been previously developed so as to lead to such a state.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpajjantassa pana, bhante, bhikkhuno katame dhammā paṭhamaṃ nirujjhanti, yadi vā kāyasaṅkhāro, yadi vā vacīsaṅkhāro, yadi vā cittasaṅkhāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, which cease first for a mendicant who is entering the cessation of perception and feeling: physical, verbal, or mental processes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpajjantassa kho, gahapati, bhikkhuno vacīsaṅkhāro paṭhamaṃ nirujjhati, tato kāyasaṅkhāro, tato cittasaṅkhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Verbal processes cease first, then physical, then mental.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yvāyaṃ, bhante, mato kālaṅkato, yo cāyaṃ bhikkhu saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpanno, imesaṃ kiṃ nānākaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s the difference between someone who has passed away and a mendicant who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yvāyaṃ, gahapati, mato kālaṅkato tassa kāyasaṅkhāro niruddho paṭippassaddho, vacīsaṅkhāro niruddho paṭippassaddho, cittasaṅkhāro niruddho paṭippassaddho, āyu parikkhīṇo, usmā vūpasantā, indriyāni viparibhinnāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When someone dies, their physical, verbal, and mental processes have ceased and stilled; their vitality is spent; their warmth is dissipated; and their faculties have disintegrated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca khvāyaṃ, gahapati, bhikkhu saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpanno, tassapi kāyasaṅkhāro niruddho paṭippassaddho, vacīsaṅkhāro niruddho paṭippassaddho, cittasaṅkhāro niruddho paṭippassaddho, āyu aparikkhīṇo, usmā avūpasantā, indriyāni vippasannāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, their physical, verbal, and mental processes have ceased and stilled. But their vitality is not spent; their warmth is not dissipated; and their faculties are very clear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ, gahapati, mato kālaṅkato, yo cāyaṃ bhikkhu saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpanno, idaṃ nesaṃ nānākaraṇan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the difference between someone who has passed away and a mendicant who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ pana, bhante, saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhānaṃ hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how does someone emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, gahapati, saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhahantassa bhikkhuno evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A mendicant who is emerging from such an attainment does not think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhahissan’ti vā ‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhahāmī’ti vā ‘ahaṃ saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhito’ti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I will emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling’ or ‘I am emerging from the cessation of perception and feeling’ or ‘I have emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha khvassa pubbeva tathā cittaṃ bhāvitaṃ hoti, yaṃ taṃ tathattāya upanetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, their mind has been previously developed so as to lead to such a state.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhahantassa pana, bhante, bhikkhuno katame dhammā paṭhamaṃ uppajjanti, yadi vā kāyasaṅkhāro, yadi vā vacīsaṅkhāro, yadi vā cittasaṅkhāro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, which arise first for a mendicant who is emerging from the cessation of perception and feeling: physical, verbal, or mental processes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhahantassa, gahapati, bhikkhuno cittasaṅkhāro paṭhamaṃ uppajjati, tato kāyasaṅkhāro, tato vacīsaṅkhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mental processes arise first, then physical, then verbal.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhitaṃ pana, bhante, bhikkhuṃ kati phassā phusanti”? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, when a mendicant has emerged from the attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling, how many kinds of contact do they experience?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhitaṃ kho, gahapati, bhikkhuṃ tayo phassā phusanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They experience three kinds of contact: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suññato phasso, animitto phasso, appaṇihito phasso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">emptiness, signless, and undirected contacts.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu … pe … uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhitassa pana, bhante, bhikkhuno kiṃninnaṃ cittaṃ hoti, kiṃpoṇaṃ, kiṃpabbhāran”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, when a mendicant has emerged from the attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling, what does their mind slant, slope, and incline to?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhitassa kho, gahapati, bhikkhuno vivekaninnaṃ cittaṃ hoti vivekapoṇaṃ vivekapabbhāran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Their mind slants, slopes, and inclines to seclusion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho citto gahapati āyasmato kāmabhussa bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā āyasmantaṃ kāmabhuṃ uttariṃ pañhaṃ apucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir,” Citta approved and agreed with what Kāmabhū said. Then he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā pana, bhante, kati dhammā bahūpakārā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how many things are helpful for attaining the cessation of perception and feeling?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Addhā kho tvaṃ, gahapati, yaṃ paṭhamaṃ pucchitabbaṃ taṃ pucchasi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, householder, you’ve finally asked what you should have asked first! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca tyāhaṃ byākarissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nevertheless, I will answer you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā kho, gahapati, dve dhammā bahūpakārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two things are helpful for attaining the cessation of perception and feeling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samatho ca vipassanā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">serenity and discernment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
