<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>41.05-5. Paṭhamakāmabhūsutta  - 5. With Kāmabhū (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">41.05. 5. Paṭhamakāmabhūsutta  - 5. With Kāmabhū (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cittavagga  - 1. With Citta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā kāmabhū macchikāsaṇḍe viharati ambāṭakavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Kāmabhū was staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yenāyasmā kāmabhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ kāmabhuṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho cittaṃ gahapatiṃ āyasmā kāmabhū etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta the householder went up to Venerable Kāmabhū, bowed, and sat down to one side. Kāmabhū said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vuttamidaṃ, gahapati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, there is this saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Nelaṅgo setapacchādo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘With flawless wheel and white canopy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekāro vattatī ratho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the one-spoke chariot rolls on. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anīghaṃ passa āyantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">See it come, untroubled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chinnasotaṃ abandhanan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with stream cut, unbound.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa nu kho, gahapati, saṅkhittena bhāsitassa kathaṃ vitthārena attho daṭṭhabbo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How should we see the detailed meaning of this brief statement?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho etaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā bhāsitan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, was this spoken by the Buddha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, gahapatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, householder.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhante, muhuttaṃ āgamehi yāvassa atthaṃ pekkhāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, sir, please wait a moment while I consider the meaning of this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati muhuttaṃ tuṇhī hutvā āyasmantaṃ kāmabhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then after a short silence Citta said to Kāmabhū: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Nelaṅgan’ti kho, bhante, sīlānametaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, ‘flawless wheel’ is a term for ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Setapacchādo’ti kho, bhante, vimuttiyā etaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘White canopy’ is a term for freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ekāro’ti kho, bhante, satiyā etaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘One spoke’ is a term for mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Vattatī’ti kho, bhante, abhikkamapaṭikkamassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Rolls on’ is a term for going forward and coming back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ratho’ti kho, bhante, imassetaṃ cātumahābhūtikassa kāyassa adhivacanaṃ mātāpettikasambhavassa odanakummāsūpacayassa aniccucchādanaparimaddanabhedanaviddhaṃsanadhammassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Chariot’ is a term for this body made up of the four primary elements, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgo kho, bhante, nīgho, doso nīgho, moho nīgho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed, hate, and delusion are troubles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu ‘anīgho’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a mendicant who has ended the defilements is called ‘untroubled’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Āyantan’ti kho, bhante, arahato etaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The one who comes’ is a term for the perfected one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Soto’ti kho, bhante, taṇhāyetaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Stream’ is a term for craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given this up, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, and obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu ‘chinnasoto’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a mendicant who has ended the defilements is said to have ‘cut the stream’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgo kho, bhante, bandhanaṃ, doso bandhanaṃ, moho bandhanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed, hate, and delusion are bonds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu ‘abandhano’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a mendicant who has ended the defilements is called ‘unbound’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhante, yaṃ taṃ bhagavatā vuttaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, sir, that’s how I understand the detailed meaning of what the Buddha said in brief: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Nelaṅgo setapacchādo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘With flawless wheel and white canopy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekāro vattatī ratho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the one-spoke chariot rolls on. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anīghaṃ passa āyantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">See it come, untroubled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chinnasotaṃ abandhanan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with stream cut, unbound.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, bhante, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṃ vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lābhā te, gahapati, suladdhaṃ te, gahapati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re fortunate, householder, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa te gambhīre buddhavacane paññācakkhu kamatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to traverse the Buddha’s deep teachings with the eye of wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
