<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>41.10-10. Gilānadassanasutta  - 10. Seeing the Sick </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">41.10. 10. Gilānadassanasutta  - 10. Seeing the Sick </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cittavagga  - 1. With Citta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena citto gahapati ābādhiko hoti dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the householder Citta was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā ārāmadevatā vanadevatā rukkhadevatā osadhitiṇavanappatīsu adhivatthā devatā saṅgamma samāgamma cittaṃ gahapatiṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several deities of the parks, forests, trees, and those who haunt the herbs, grass, and big trees came together and said to Citta, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṇidhehi, gahapati, anāgatamaddhānaṃ rājā assaṃ cakkavattī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, make a wish to become a wheel-turning monarch in the future!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, citto gahapati tā ārāmadevatā vanadevatā rukkhadevatā osadhitiṇavanappatīsu adhivatthā devatā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they said this, Citta said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tampi aniccaṃ, tampi addhuvaṃ, tampi pahāya gamanīyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That too is impermanent! That too will pass! That too will be left behind!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, cittassa gahapatino mittāmaccā ñātisālohitā cittaṃ gahapatiṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, his friends and colleagues, relatives and family members said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“satiṃ, ayyaputta, upaṭṭhapehi, mā vippalapī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Be mindful, lord! Don’t babble.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ tāhaṃ vadāmi yaṃ maṃ tumhe evaṃ vadetha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What have I said that makes you say that?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘satiṃ, ayyaputta, upaṭṭhapehi, mā vippalapī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ kho tvaṃ, ayyaputta, vadesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s because you said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tampi aniccaṃ, tampi addhuvaṃ, tampi pahāya gamanīyan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That too is impermanent! That too will pass! That too will be left behind!’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathā hi pana maṃ ārāmadevatā vanadevatā rukkhadevatā osadhitiṇavanappatīsu adhivatthā devatā evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Oh, well, that’s because the deities of the parks, forests, trees, and those who haunt the herbs, grass, and big trees said to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇidhehi, gahapati, anāgatamaddhānaṃ rājā assaṃ cakkavattī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Householder, make a wish to become a wheel-turning monarch in the future!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ evaṃ vadāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I said to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tampi aniccaṃ … pe … tampi pahāya gamanīyan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That too is impermanent! That too will pass! That too will be left behind!’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana tā, ayyaputta, ārāmadevatā vanadevatā rukkhadevatā osadhitiṇavanappatīsu adhivatthā devatā atthavasaṃ sampassamānā evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what reason do they see for saying that to you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇidhehi, gahapati, anāgatamaddhānaṃ rājā assaṃ cakkavattī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tāsaṃ kho ārāmadevatānaṃ vanadevatānaṃ rukkhadevatānaṃ osadhitiṇavanappatīsu adhivatthānaṃ devatānaṃ evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ kho citto gahapati, sīlavā kalyāṇadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This householder Citta is ethical, of good character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṇidahissati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes a wish to </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgatamaddhānaṃ rājā assaṃ cakkavattī’ti, ‘tassa kho ayaṃ ijjhissati, sīlavato cetopaṇidhi visuddhattā dhammiko dhammikaṃ phalaṃ anupassatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">become a wheel-turning monarch in the future, his heart’s wish will succeed because of the purity of his ethics. And then as a proper, principled king he will provide proper spirit-offerings.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imaṃ kho tā ārāmadevatā vanadevatā rukkhadevatā osadhitiṇavanappatīsu adhivatthā devatā atthavasaṃ sampassamānā evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the reason they see for saying to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇidhehi, gahapati, anāgatamaddhānaṃ rājā assaṃ cakkavattī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Householder, make a wish to become a wheel-turning monarch in the future!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ evaṃ vadāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I said to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tampi aniccaṃ, tampi addhuvaṃ, tampi pahāya gamanīyan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That too is impermanent! That too will pass! That too will be left behind!’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, ayyaputta, amhepi ovadāhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then, lord, advise us!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmā hi vo evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatā bhavissāma: </span></p>
<p class="p3">We will have experiential confidence in the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgatā bhavissāma: </span></p>
<p class="p3">We will have experiential confidence in the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe aveccappasādena samannāgatā bhavissāma: </span></p>
<p class="p3">We will have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ujuppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ñāyappaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, sāmīcippaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, yadidaṃ cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, straightforward, methodical, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho pana kiñci kule deyyadhammaṃ sabbaṃ taṃ appaṭivibhattaṃ bhavissati sīlavantehi kalyāṇadhammehīti evañhi vo sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And we will share without reservation all the gifts available to give in our family with those who are ethical and of good character.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati mittāmacce ñātisālohite buddhe ca dhamme ca saṅghe ca cāge ca samādapetvā kālamakāsīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after Citta had encouraged his friends and colleagues, relatives and family members in the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, and generosity, he passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojanaṃ dve isidattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahako kāmabhūpi ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Godatto ca nigaṇṭho ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelena gilānadassananti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on Citta the Householder are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
