<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>41.04-4. Mahakapāṭihāriyasutta  - 4. Mahaka’s Demonstration </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">41.04. 4. Mahakapāṭihāriyasutta  - 4. Mahaka’s Demonstration </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cittavagga  - 1. With Citta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ sambahulā therā bhikkhū macchikāsaṇḍe viharanti ambāṭakavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yena therā bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā there bhikkhū abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho citto gahapati there bhikkhū etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta the householder went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“adhivāsentu me, bhante therā, svātanāya gokule bhattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sirs, may the senior mendicants please accept my offering of tomorrow’s meal in my barn.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesuṃ kho therā bhikkhū tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati therānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ adhivāsanaṃ viditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā there bhikkhū abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing that the senior mendicants had consented, Citta got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled them, keeping them on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho therā bhikkhū tassā rattiyā accayena pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena cittassa gahapatino gokulaṃ tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then when the night had passed, the senior mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, went to Citta’s barn, and sat down on the seats spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati there bhikkhū paṇītena sappipāyāsena sahatthā santappesi sampavāresi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta served and satisfied the senior mendicants with his own hands with delicious milk-rice made with ghee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho therā bhikkhū bhuttāvino onītapattapāṇino uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the senior mendicants had eaten and washed their hands and bowls, they got up from their seats and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittopi kho gahapati “sesakaṃ vissajjethā”ti vatvā there bhikkhū piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Citta instructed that the remainder of the food be distributed, then followed behind the senior mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena uṇhaṃ hoti kuthitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the heat was sweltering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te ca therā bhikkhū paveliyamānena maññe kāyena gacchanti, yathā taṃ bhojanaṃ bhuttāvino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those senior mendicants walked along as if their bodies were melting, as happens after a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā mahako tasmiṃ bhikkhusaṃghe sabbanavako hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Mahaka was the most junior mendicant in that Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahako āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Mahaka said to the senior venerable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu khvassa, bhante thera, sītako ca vāto vāyeyya, abbhasampilāpo ca assa, devo ca ekamekaṃ phusāyeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wouldn’t it be nice, sir, if a cool wind blew, a cloud canopy formed, and a gentle rain drizzled down?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu khvassa, āvuso mahaka, yaṃ sītako ca vāto vāyeyya, abbhasampilāpo ca assa, devo ca ekamekaṃ phusāyeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It would indeed be nice, Reverend Mahaka.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahako tathārūpaṃ iddhābhisaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkhari yathā sītako ca vāto vāyi, abbhasampilāpo ca assa, devo ca ekamekaṃ phusi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahaka used his psychic power to will that a cool wind would blow, a cloud canopy would form, and a gentle rain would drizzle down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho cittassa gahapatino etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo kho imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṃghe sabbanavako bhikkhu tassāyaṃ evarūpo iddhānubhāvo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The most junior mendicant in this Saṅgha has such psychic power!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahako ārāmaṃ sampāpuṇitvā āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they reached the monastery, Mahaka said to the senior venerable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alamettāvatā, bhante therā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, is that sufficient?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alamettāvatā, āvuso mahaka. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s sufficient, Reverend Mahaka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamettāvatā, āvuso mahaka. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve done enough </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pūjitamettāvatā, āvuso mahakā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and offered enough.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho therā bhikkhū yathāvihāraṃ agamaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the senior mendicants entered their dwellings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmāpi mahako sakaṃ vihāraṃ agamāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and Mahaka entered his own dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yenāyasmā mahako tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ mahakaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho citto gahapati āyasmantaṃ mahakaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta went up to Mahaka, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, ayyo mahako uttari manussadhammaṃ iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ dassetū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, please show me a superhuman demonstration of psychic power.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi tvaṃ, gahapati, ālinde uttarāsaṅgaṃ paññapetvā tiṇakalāpaṃ okāsehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, then, householder, place your upper robe on the porch and spread a handful of grass on it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho citto gahapati āyasmato mahakassa paṭissutvā ālinde uttarāsaṅgaṃ paññapetvā tiṇakalāpaṃ okāsesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Citta, and did as he was asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahako vihāraṃ pavisitvā sūcighaṭikaṃ datvā tathārūpaṃ iddhābhisaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkhari yathā tālacchiggaḷena ca aggaḷantarikāya ca acci nikkhamitvā tiṇāni jhāpesi, uttarāsaṅgaṃ na jhāpesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahaka entered his dwelling and latched the door. Then he used his psychic power to will that a flame shoot out through the keyhole and the chink in the door, and it burned up the grass but not the upper robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati uttarāsaṅgaṃ papphoṭetvā saṃviggo lomahaṭṭhajāto ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta shook out his upper robe and stood to one side, shocked and awestruck. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahako vihārā nikkhamitvā cittaṃ gahapatiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahaka left his dwelling and said to Citta, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alamettāvatā, gahapatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is that sufficient, householder?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alamettāvatā, bhante mahaka. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s sufficient, sir, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamettāvatā, bhante, mahaka. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve done enough </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pūjitamettāvatā, bhante mahaka. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and offered enough. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhiramatu, bhante, ayyo mahako macchikāsaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I hope Venerable Mahaka is happy here in Macchikāsaṇḍa, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ramaṇīyaṃ ambāṭakavanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the Wild Mango Grove is lovely. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ ayyassa mahakassa ussukkaṃ karissāmi cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll make sure that Venerable Mahaka is provided with robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kalyāṇaṃ vuccati, gahapatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s nice of you to say, householder.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahako senāsanaṃ saṃsāmetvā pattacīvaramādāya macchikāsaṇḍamhā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But Mahaka set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, left Macchikasaṇḍa, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ macchikāsaṇḍamhā pakkāmi, tathā pakkantova ahosi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">never to return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na puna paccāgacchīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
