<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>41.03-3. Dutiyaisidattasutta  - 3. With Isidatta (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">41.03. 3. Dutiyaisidattasutta  - 3. With Isidatta (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cittavagga  - 1. With Citta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ sambahulā therā bhikkhū macchikāsaṇḍe viharanti ambāṭakavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yena therā bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā there bhikkhū abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho citto gahapati there bhikkhū etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta the householder went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“adhivāsentu me, bhante therā, svātanāya bhattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sirs, may the senior mendicants please accept my offering of tomorrow’s meal.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesuṃ kho therā bhikkhū tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati therānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ adhivāsanaṃ viditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā there bhikkhū abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing that the senior mendicants had consented, Citta got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled them, keeping them on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho therā bhikkhū tassā rattiyā accayena pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena cittassa gahapatissa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then when the night had passed, the senior mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, went to Citta’s home, and sat down on the seats spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yena therā bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā there bhikkhū abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho citto gahapati āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So he went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the senior venerable: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yā imā, bhante thera, anekavihitā diṭṭhiyo loke uppajjanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, there are many different views that arise in the world. For example: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sassato lokoti vā, asassato lokoti vā, antavā lokoti vā, anantavā lokoti vā, taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīranti vā, aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīranti vā, hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, hoti ca na ca hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, neva hoti na na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā’ti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the world is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are the same thing, or they are different things; after death, a Realized One exists, or doesn’t exist, or both exists and doesn’t exist, or neither exists nor doesn’t exist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni cimāni dvāsaṭṭhi diṭṭhigatāni brahmajāle bhaṇitāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And also the sixty-two misconceptions spoken of in the Supreme Net Discourse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā nu kho, bhante, diṭṭhiyo kismiṃ sati honti, kismiṃ asati na hontī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When what exists do these views come to be? When what doesn’t exist do these views not come to be?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā thero tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the senior venerable kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho citto gahapati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho citto gahapati āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time, Citta said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yā imā, bhante thera, anekavihitā diṭṭhiyo loke uppajjanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, there are many different views that arise in the world. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sassato lokoti vā, asassato lokoti vā, antavā lokoti vā, anantavā lokoti vā, taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīranti vā, aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīranti vā, hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, hoti ca na ca hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, neva hoti na na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni cimāni dvāsaṭṭhi diṭṭhigatāni brahmajāle bhaṇitāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā nu kho, bhante, diṭṭhiyo kismiṃ sati honti, kismiṃ asati na hontī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When what exists do these views come to be? When what doesn’t exist do these views not come to be?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho āyasmā thero tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a second time and a third time the senior venerable kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā isidatto tasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe sabbanavako hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Isidatta was the most junior mendicant in that Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā isidatto āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He said to the senior venerable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“byākaromahaṃ, bhante thera, cittassa gahapatino etaṃ pañhan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may I answer Citta’s question?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Byākarohi tvaṃ, āvuso isidatta, cittassa gahapatino etaṃ pañhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Answer it, Reverend Isidatta.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañhi tvaṃ, gahapati, pucchasi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, is this your question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yā imā, bhante thera, anekavihitā diṭṭhiyo loke uppajjanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are many different views that arise in the world … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sassato lokoti vā … pe …; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā nu kho, bhante, diṭṭhiyo kismiṃ sati honti, kismiṃ asati na hontī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When what exists do these views come to be? When what doesn’t exist do these views not come to be?’’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā imā, gahapati, anekavihitā diṭṭhiyo loke uppajjanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, there are many different views that arise in the world. For example: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sassato lokoti vā, asassato lokoti vā, antavā lokoti vā anantavā lokoti vā, taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīranti vā, aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīranti vā, hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, hoti ca na ca hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā, neva hoti na na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇāti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the world is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are the same thing, or they are different things; after death, a Realized One exists, or doesn’t exist, or both exists and doesn’t exist, or neither exists nor doesn’t exist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni cimāni dvāsaṭṭhi diṭṭhigatāni brahmajāle bhaṇitāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And also the sixty-two misconceptions spoken of in the Supreme Net Discourse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, gahapati, diṭṭhiyo sakkāyadiṭṭhiyā sati honti, sakkāyadiṭṭhiyā asati na hontī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These views come to be when identity view exists. When identity view does not exist they do not come to be.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ pana, bhante, sakkāyadiṭṭhi hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how does identity view come about?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, gahapati, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṃ adassāvī ariyadhammassa akovido ariyadhamme avinīto, sappurisānaṃ adassāvī sappurisadhammassa akovido sappurisadhamme avinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when an uneducated ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ attato samanupassati, rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ, attani vā rūpaṃ, rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ attato samanupassati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati, viññāṇavantaṃ vā attānaṃ, attani vā viññāṇaṃ, viññāṇasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, sakkāyadiṭṭhi hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how identity view comes about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ pana, bhante, sakkāyadiṭṭhi na hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how does identity view not come about?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, gahapati, sutavā ariyasāvako ariyānaṃ dassāvī ariyadhammassa kovido ariyadhamme suvinīto sappurisānaṃ dassāvī sappurisadhammassa kovido sappurisadhamme suvinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when an educated noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na rūpaṃ attato samanupassati, na rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ, na attani vā rūpaṃ, na rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saññaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati, na viññāṇavantaṃ vā attānaṃ, na attani vā viññāṇaṃ, na viññāṇasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, gahapati, sakkāyadiṭṭhi na hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how identity view does not come about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kuto, bhante, ayyo isidatto āgacchatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, where has Venerable Isidatta come from?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Avantiyā kho, gahapati, āgacchāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I come from Avanti, householder.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, bhante, avantiyā isidatto nāma kulaputto amhākaṃ adiṭṭhasahāyo pabbajito? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, there’s a friend of mine called Isidatta who I’ve never met. He’s gone forth from a good family in Avanti. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭho so āyasmatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Have you met him?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, gahapatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, householder.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kahaṃ nu kho so, bhante, āyasmā etarahi viharatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, where is that venerable now staying?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā isidatto tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Isidatta kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayyo no, bhante, isidatto”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, are you that Isidatta?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, gahapatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, householder.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhiramatu, bhante, ayyo isidatto macchikāsaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I hope Venerable Isidatta is happy here in Macchikāsaṇḍa, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ramaṇīyaṃ ambāṭakavanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the Wild Mango Grove is lovely. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ ayyassa isidattassa ussukkaṃ karissāmi cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll make sure that Venerable Isidatta is provided with robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kalyāṇaṃ vuccati, gahapatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s nice of you to say, householder.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati āyasmato isidattassa bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā there bhikkhū paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappesi sampavāresi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Citta, having approved and agreed with what Isidatta said, served and satisfied the senior mendicants with his own hands with a variety of delicious foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho therā bhikkhū bhuttāvino onītapattapāṇino uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the senior mendicants had eaten and washed their hands and bowls, they got up from their seats and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā thero āyasmantaṃ isidattaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the senior venerable said to Venerable Isidatta, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu kho taṃ, āvuso isidatta, eso pañho paṭibhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Isidatta, it’s good that you felt inspired to answer that question, because I didn’t. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neso pañho maṃ paṭibhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tenahāvuso isidatta, yadā aññathāpi evarūpo pañho āgaccheyya, taññevettha paṭibhāseyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So when a similar question comes up, you should also answer it as you feel inspired.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā isidatto senāsanaṃ saṃsāmetvā pattacīvaramādāya macchikāsaṇḍamhā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But Isidatta set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, left Macchikasaṇḍa, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ macchikāsaṇḍamhā pakkāmi, tathā pakkantova ahosi, na puna paccāgacchīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">never to return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
