<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>41.01-1. Saṃyojanasutta  - 1. The Fetter </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">41.01. 1. Saṃyojanasutta  - 1. The Fetter </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cittavagga  - 1. With Citta </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ sambahulā therā bhikkhū macchikāsaṇḍe viharanti ambāṭakavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulānaṃ therānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantānaṃ maṇḍalamāḷe sannisinnānaṃ sannipatitānaṃ ayamantarākathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time, after the meal, on return from alms-round, several senior mendicants sat together in the pavilion and this discussion came up among them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘saṃyojanan’ti vā, āvuso, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā nānatthā nānābyañjanā udāhu ekatthā byañjanameva nānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things prone to being fettered’: do these things differ in both meaning and phrasing? Or do they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrekaccehi therehi bhikkhūhi evaṃ byākataṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some senior mendicants answered like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘saṃyojanan’ti vā, āvuso, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā nānatthā ceva nānābyañjanā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things prone to being fettered’: these things differ in both meaning and phrasing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaccehi therehi bhikkhūhi evaṃ byākataṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But some senior mendicants answered like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘saṃyojanan’ti vā, āvuso, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā ekatthā byañjanameva nānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things prone to being fettered’ mean the same thing; they differ only in the phrasing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena citto gahapati migapathakaṃ anuppatto hoti kenacideva karaṇīyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the householder Citta had arrived at Migapathaka on some business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho citto gahapati sambahulānaṃ kira therānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantānaṃ maṇḍalamāḷe sannisinnānaṃ sannipatitānaṃ ayamantarākathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He heard about what those senior mendicants were discussing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘saṃyojanan’ti vā, āvuso, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā nānatthā nānābyañjanā udāhu ekatthā byañjanameva nānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrekaccehi therehi bhikkhūhi evaṃ byākataṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘saṃyojanan’ti vā, āvuso, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā nānatthā ceva nānābyañjanā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaccehi therehi bhikkhūhi evaṃ byākataṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘saṃyojanan’ti vā, āvuso, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā ekatthā byañjanameva nānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho citto gahapati yena therā bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā there bhikkhū abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho citto gahapati there bhikkhū etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So he went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bhante, sambahulānaṃ kira therānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantānaṃ maṇḍalamāḷe sannisinnānaṃ sannipatitānaṃ ayamantarākathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sirs, I heard that you were discussing whether the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things prone to being fettered’ differ in both meaning and phrasing, or whether they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṃyojanan’ti vā, āvuso, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā nānatthā nānābyañjanā udāhu ekatthā byañjanameva nānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaccehi therehi bhikkhūhi evaṃ byākataṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘saṃyojanan’ti vā, āvuso, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā nānatthā ceva nānābyañjanā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaccehi therehi bhikkhūhi evaṃ byākataṃ “‘saṃyojanan’ti vā, āvuso, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā ekatthā byañjanameva nānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, gahapatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s right, householder.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Saṃyojanan’ti vā, bhante, ‘saṃyojaniyā dhammā’ti vā ime dhammā nānatthā ceva nānābyañjanā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sirs, the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things prone to being fettered’: these things differ in both meaning and phrasing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena hi, bhante, upamaṃ vo karissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well then, sirs, I shall give you a simile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upamāyapidhekacce viññū purisā bhāsitassa atthaṃ ājānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For by means of a simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, kāḷo ca balībaddo odāto ca balībaddo ekena dāmena vā yottena vā saṃyuttā assu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a black ox and a white ox yoked by a single harness or yoke. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo nu kho evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Would it be right to say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kāḷo balībaddo odātassa balībaddassa saṃyojanaṃ, odāto balībaddo kāḷassa balībaddassa saṃyojanan’ti, sammā nu kho so vadamāno vadeyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">the black ox is the yoke of the white ox, or the white ox is the yoke of the black ox?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, gahapati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, householder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho, gahapati, kāḷo balībaddo odātassa balībaddassa saṃyojanaṃ, napi odāto balībaddo kāḷassa balībaddassa saṃyojanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The black ox is not the yoke of the white ox, nor is the white ox the yoke of the black ox. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena kho te ekena dāmena vā yottena vā saṃyuttā taṃ tattha saṃyojanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The yoke there is the single harness or yoke that they’re yoked by.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhante, na cakkhu rūpānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, na rūpā cakkhussa saṃyojanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, the eye is not the fetter of sights, nor are sights the fetter of the eye. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca tattha tadubhayaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandarāgo taṃ tattha saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sotaṃ saddānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ghānaṃ gandhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jivhā rasānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kāyo phoṭṭhabbānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, na phoṭṭhabbā kāyassa saṃyojanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca tattha tadubhayaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandarāgo taṃ tattha saṃyojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na mano dhammānaṃ saṃyojanaṃ, na dhammā manassa saṃyojanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind is not the fetter of thoughts, nor are thoughts the fetter of the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca tattha tadubhayaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandarāgo taṃ tattha saṃyojanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lābhā te, gahapati, suladdhaṃ te, gahapati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re fortunate, householder, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa te gambhīre buddhavacane paññācakkhu kamatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to traverse the Buddha’s deep teachings with the eye of wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
