<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>42.02-2. Tālapuṭasutta  - 2. With Tāḷapuṭa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">42.02. 2. Tālapuṭasutta  - 2. With Tāḷapuṭa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Gāmaṇivagga  - 1. Chiefs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tālapuṭo naṭagāmaṇi yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho tālapuṭo naṭagāmaṇi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Tāḷapuṭa the dancing master came up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bhante, pubbakānaṃ ācariyapācariyānaṃ naṭānaṃ bhāsamānānaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have heard that the dancers of the past who were teachers of teachers said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so naṭo raṅgamajjhe samajjamajjhe saccālikena janaṃ hāseti rameti, so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pahāsānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage or at a festival with truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of laughing gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha bhagavā kimāhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does the Buddha say about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alaṃ, gāmaṇi, tiṭṭhatetaṃ. Mā maṃ etaṃ pucchī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho tālapuṭo naṭagāmaṇi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bhante, pubbakānaṃ ācariyapācariyānaṃ naṭānaṃ bhāsamānānaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so naṭo raṅgamajjhe samajjamajjhe saccālikena janaṃ hāseti rameti, so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pahāsānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha bhagavā kimāhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alaṃ, gāmaṇi, tiṭṭhatetaṃ. Mā maṃ etaṃ pucchī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho tālapuṭo naṭagāmaṇi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time Tāḷapuṭa said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bhante, pubbakānaṃ ācariyapācariyānaṃ naṭānaṃ bhāsamānānaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have heard that the dancers of the past who were teachers of teachers said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so naṭo raṅgamajjhe samajjamajjhe saccālikena janaṃ hāseti rameti, so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pahāsānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage or at a festival with truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of laughing gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha bhagavā kimāhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does the Buddha say about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Addhā kho tyāhaṃ, gāmaṇi, na labhāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Clearly, chief, I’m not getting through to you when I say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘alaṃ, gāmaṇi, tiṭṭhatetaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Enough, chief, let it be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā maṃ etaṃ pucchī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t ask me that.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca tyāhaṃ byākarissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nevertheless, I will answer you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe kho, gāmaṇi, sattā avītarāgā rāgabandhanabaddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When sentient beings are still not free of greed, and are still bound by greed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ naṭo raṅgamajjhe samajjamajjhe ye dhammā rajanīyā te upasaṃharati bhiyyoso mattāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a dancer in a stage or festival presents them with even more arousing things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe kho, gāmaṇi, sattā avītadosā dosabandhanabaddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When sentient beings are still not free of hate, and are still bound by hate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ naṭo raṅgamajjhe samajjamajjhe ye dhammā dosanīyā te upasaṃharati bhiyyoso mattāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a dancer in a stage or festival presents them with even more hateful things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe kho, gāmaṇi, sattā avītamohā mohabandhanabaddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When sentient beings are still not free of delusion, and are still bound by delusion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ naṭo raṅgamajjhe samajjamajjhe ye dhammā mohanīyā te upasaṃharati bhiyyoso mattāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a dancer in a stage or festival presents them with even more delusory things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So attanā matto pamatto pare madetvā pamādetvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pahāso nāma nirayo tattha upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, being heedless and negligent themselves, they’ve encouraged others to be heedless and negligent. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the hell called ‘Laughter’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho panassa evaṃdiṭṭhi hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if you have such a view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so naṭo raṅgamajjhe samajjamajjhe saccālikena janaṃ hāseti rameti, so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pahāsānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī’ti, sāssa hoti micchādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage or at a festival with truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of laughing gods.’ This is your wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhikassa kho panāhaṃ, gāmaṇi, purisapuggalassa dvinnaṃ gatīnaṃ aññataraṃ gatiṃ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirayaṃ vā tiracchānayoniṃ vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">hell or the animal realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, tālapuṭo naṭagāmaṇi parodi assūni pavattesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Tāḷapuṭa cried and burst out in tears. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etaṃ kho tyāhaṃ, gāmaṇi, nālatthaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is what I didn’t get through to you when I said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘alaṃ, gāmaṇi, tiṭṭhatetaṃ; mā maṃ etaṃ pucchī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhante, etaṃ rodāmi yaṃ maṃ bhagavā evamāha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’m not crying because of what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api cāhaṃ, bhante, pubbakehi ācariyapācariyehi naṭehi dīgharattaṃ nikato vañcito paluddho: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But sir, for a long time I’ve been cheated, tricked, and deceived by the dancers of the past who were teachers of teachers, who said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so naṭo raṅgamajjhe samajjamajjhe saccālikena janaṃ hāseti rameti so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pahāsānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage or at a festival with truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of laughing gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhikkantaṃ, bhante, abhikkantaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, sir! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhagavatā anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Labheyyāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavato santike pabbajjaṃ, labheyyaṃ upasampadan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alattha kho tālapuṭo naṭagāmaṇi bhagavato santike pabbajjaṃ, alattha upasampadaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the dancing master Tāḷapuṭa received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acirūpasampanno ca panāyasmā tālapuṭo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not long after his ordination, Venerable Tāḷapuṭa </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">became one of the perfected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
