<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>42.03-3. Yodhājīvasutta  - 3. A Warrior </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">42.03. 3. Yodhājīvasutta  - 3. A Warrior </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Gāmaṇivagga  - 1. Chiefs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yodhājīvo gāmaṇi yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho yodhājīvo gāmaṇi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Dustin the warrior chief went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bhante, pubbakānaṃ ācariyapācariyānaṃ yodhājīvānaṃ bhāsamānānaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have heard that the warriors of the past who were teachers of teachers said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so yodhājīvo saṅgāme ussahati vāyamati, tamenaṃ ussahantaṃ vāyamantaṃ pare hananti pariyāpādenti, so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā parajitānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha bhagavā kimāhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does the Buddha say about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alaṃ, gāmaṇi, tiṭṭhatetaṃ; mā maṃ etaṃ pucchī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho yodhājīvo gāmaṇi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time the warrior chief said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bhante, pubbakānaṃ ācariyapācariyānaṃ yodhājīvānaṃ bhāsamānānaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have heard that the warriors of the past who were teachers of teachers said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so yodhājīvo saṅgāme ussahati vāyamati, tamenaṃ ussahantaṃ vāyamantaṃ pare hananti pariyāpādenti, so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā parajitānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha bhagavā kimāhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does the Buddha say about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Addhā kho tyāhaṃ, gāmaṇi, na labhāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Clearly, chief, I’m not getting through to you when I say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘alaṃ, gāmaṇi, tiṭṭhatetaṃ; mā maṃ etaṃ pucchī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca tyāhaṃ byākarissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nevertheless, I will answer you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, gāmaṇi, yodhājīvo saṅgāme ussahati vāyamati, tassa taṃ cittaṃ pubbe gahitaṃ dukkaṭaṃ duppaṇihitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a warrior strives and struggles in battle, their mind is already low, degraded, and misdirected as they think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ime sattā haññantu vā bajjhantu vā ucchijjantu vā vinassantu vā mā vā ahesuṃ iti vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ ussahantaṃ vāyamantaṃ pare hananti pariyāpādenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">His foes kill him and finish him off, and </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā parajito nāma nirayo tattha upapajjatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the hell called ‘The Fallen’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho panassa evaṃ diṭṭhi hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if you have such a view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so yodhājīvo saṅgāme ussahati vāyamati tamenaṃ ussahantaṃ vāyamantaṃ pare hananti pariyāpādenti, so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā parajitānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī’ti, sāssa hoti micchādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.’ This is your wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhikassa kho panāhaṃ, gāmaṇi, purisapuggalassa dvinnaṃ gatīnaṃ aññataraṃ gatiṃ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirayaṃ vā tiracchānayoniṃ vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">hell or the animal realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, yodhājīvo gāmaṇi parodi, assūni pavattesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Dustin the warrior chief cried and burst out in tears. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etaṃ kho tyāhaṃ, gāmaṇi, nālatthaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is what I didn’t get through to you when I said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘alaṃ, gāmaṇi, tiṭṭhatetaṃ; mā maṃ etaṃ pucchī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhante, etaṃ rodāmi yaṃ maṃ bhagavā evamāha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’m not crying because of what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api cāhaṃ, bhante, pubbakehi ācariyapācariyehi yodhājīvehi dīgharattaṃ nikato vañcito paluddho: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But sir, for a long time I’ve been cheated, tricked, and deceived by the warriors of the past who were teachers of teachers, who said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so yodhājīvo saṅgāme ussahati vāyamati, tamenaṃ ussahantaṃ vāyamantaṃ pare hananti pariyāpādenti, so kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā parajitānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhikkantaṃ, bhante … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, sir! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
