<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>44.09-9. Kutūhalasālāsutta  - 9. The Debating Hall </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">44.09. 9. Kutūhalasālāsutta  - 9. The Debating Hall </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Abyākatavagga  - 1. The Undeclared Points </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vacchagotto paribbājako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho vacchagotto paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Purimāni, bho gotama, divasāni purimatarāni sambahulānaṃ nānātitthiyānaṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ kutūhalasālāyaṃ sannisinnānaṃ sannipatitānaṃ ayamantarākathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, a few days ago several ascetics, brahmins, and wanderers who follow various other paths were sitting together in the debating hall, and this discussion came up among them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ kho pūraṇo kassapo saṅghī ceva gaṇī ca gaṇācariyo ca ñāto yasassī titthakaro sādhusammato bahujanassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This Pūraṇa Kassapa leads an order and a community, and teaches a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, regarded as holy by many people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sopi sāvakaṃ abbhatītaṃ kālaṅkataṃ upapattīsu byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a disciple passes away, he declares that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this one is reborn here, while that one is reborn there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopissa sāvako uttamapuriso paramapuriso paramapattipatto tampi sāvakaṃ abbhatītaṃ kālaṅkataṃ upapattīsu byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as for a disciple who is a supreme person, highest of people, having reached the highest point, when they pass away he also declares that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this one is reborn here, while that one is reborn there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho makkhali gosālo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">This Makkhali Gosāla … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi kho nigaṇṭho nāṭaputto … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi kho sañcayo belaṭṭhaputto … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi kho pakudho kaccāno … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pakudha Kaccāyana … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi kho ajito kesakambalo saṃghī ceva gaṇī ca gaṇācariyo ca ñāto yasassī titthakaro sādhusammato bahujanassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ajita Kesakambala leads an order and a community, and teaches a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, regarded as holy by many people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sopi sāvakaṃ abbhatītaṃ kālaṅkataṃ upapattīsu byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a disciple passes away, he declares that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this one is reborn here, while that one is reborn there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopissa sāvako uttamapuriso paramapuriso paramapattipatto tampi sāvakaṃ abbhatītaṃ kālaṅkataṃ upapattīsu byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as for a disciple who is a supreme person, highest of people, having reached the highest point, when they pass away he also declares that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno”’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this one is reborn here, while that one is reborn there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho samaṇo gotamo saṃghī ceva gaṇī ca gaṇācariyo ca ñāto yasassī titthakaro sādhusammato bahujanassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This ascetic Gotama leads an order and a community, and teaches a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, regarded as holy by many people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sopi sāvakaṃ abbhatītaṃ kālaṅkataṃ upapattīsu byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a disciple passes away, he declares that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this one is reborn here, while that one is reborn there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopissa sāvako uttamapuriso paramapuriso paramapattipatto tañca sāvakaṃ abbhatītaṃ kālaṅkataṃ upapattīsu na byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But as for a disciple who is a supreme person, highest of people, having reached the highest point, when they pass away he doesn’t declare that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this one is reborn here, while that one is reborn there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca kho naṃ evaṃ byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, he declares that they have </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘acchecchi taṇhaṃ, vivattayi saṃyojanaṃ, sammā mānābhisamayā antamakāsi dukkhassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit have made an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bho gotama, ahu deva kaṅkhā, ahu vicikicchā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I had doubt and uncertainty about that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kathaṃ nāma samaṇassa gotamassa dhammo abhiññeyyo’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘How on earth can I understand the ascetic Gotama’s teaching?’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alañhi te, vaccha, kaṅkhituṃ, alaṃ vicikicchituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Vaccha, no wonder you’re doubting and uncertain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaṅkhanīye ca pana te ṭhāne vicikicchā uppannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Doubt has come up in you about an uncertain matter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saupādānassa khvāhaṃ, vaccha, upapattiṃ paññāpemi no anupādānassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I describe rebirth for someone who grasps fuel, not for someone who doesn’t grasp fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, vaccha, aggi saupādāno jalati, no anupādāno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a fire which only burns with fuel, not without fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva khvāhaṃ, vaccha, saupādānassa upapattiṃ paññāpemi, no anupādānassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way I describe rebirth for someone who grasps fuel, not for someone who doesn’t grasp fuel.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yasmiṃ, bho gotama, samaye acci vātena khittā dūrampi gacchati, imassa pana bhavaṃ gotamo kiṃ upādānasmiṃ paññāpetī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But when a flame is blown away by the wind, what do you say is its fuel then?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yasmiṃ kho, vaccha, samaye acci vātena khittā dūrampi gacchati, tamahaṃ vātūpādānaṃ paññāpemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“At such a time, I say that it’s fueled by wind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāto hissa, vaccha, tasmiṃ samaye upādānaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the wind is its fuel then.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yasmiñca pana, bho gotama, samaye imañca kāyaṃ nikkhipati, satto ca aññataraṃ kāyaṃ anupapanno hoti, imassa pana bhavaṃ gotamo kiṃ upādānasmiṃ paññāpetī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But when someone who is attached has laid down this body and has not been reborn in one of the realms, what does Master Gotama say is their fuel then?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yasmiṃ kho, vaccha, samaye imañca kāyaṃ nikkhipati, satto ca aññataraṃ kāyaṃ anupapanno hoti, tamahaṃ taṇhūpādānaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When someone who is attached has laid down this body, Vaccha, and has not been reborn in one of the realms, I say they’re fueled by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhā hissa, vaccha, tasmiṃ samaye upādānaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For craving is their fuel then.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
