<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.025-25. Paṭhamaasappurisasutta  - 25. A Good Person (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.025. 25. Paṭhamaasappurisasutta  - 25. A Good Person (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Micchattavagga  - 3. The Wrong Way </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Asappurisañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, sappurisañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you a bad person and a good person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, asappuriso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a bad person? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco micchādiṭṭhiko hoti, micchāsaṅkappo, micchāvāco, micchākammanto, micchāājīvo, micchāvāyāmo, micchāsati, micchāsamādhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, asappuriso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a bad person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sappuriso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a good person? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sammādiṭṭhiko hoti, sammāsaṅkappo, sammāvāco, sammākammanto, sammāājīvo, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati, sammāsamādhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sappuriso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a good person.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
