<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.006-6. Paṭhamaaññatarabhikkhusutta  - 6. A Mendicant (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.006. 6. Paṭhamaaññatarabhikkhusutta  - 6. A Mendicant (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Avijjāvagga  - 1. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘brahmacariyaṃ, brahmacariyan’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called the ‘spiritual path’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho, bhante, brahmacariyaṃ, katamaṃ brahmacariyapariyosānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the spiritual path? And what is the culmination of the spiritual path?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayameva kho, bhikkhu, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo brahmacariyaṃ, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, the spiritual path is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, bhikkhu, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ brahmacariyapariyosānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the culmination of the spiritual path.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
