<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.033-33. Viraddhasutta  - 33. Missed Out </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.033. 33. Viraddhasutta  - 33. Missed Out </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Paṭipattivagga  - 4. Practice </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo viraddho, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the noble eightfold path has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo āraddho, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has undertaken the noble eightfold path has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the noble eightfold path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ayaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo viraddho, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has missed out on the noble eightfold path has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ayaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo āraddho, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has undertaken the noble eightfold path has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
