<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.024-24. Dutiyapaṭipadāsutta  - 24. Practice (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.024. 24. Dutiyapaṭipadāsutta  - 24. Practice (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Micchattavagga  - 3. The Wrong Way </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gihino vāhaṃ, bhikkhave, pabbajitassa vā micchāpaṭipadaṃ na vaṇṇemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I don’t praise wrong practice for laypeople or renunciates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihi vā, bhikkhave, pabbajito vā micchāpaṭipanno micchāpaṭipattādhikaraṇahetu nārādhako hoti ñāyaṃ dhammaṃ kusalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in the procedure of the skillful teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the wrong practice? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—micchādiṭṭhi … pe … micchāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the wrong practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihino vāhaṃ, bhikkhave, pabbajitassa vā micchāpaṭipadaṃ na vaṇṇemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t praise wrong practice for lay people or renunciates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihi vā, bhikkhave, pabbajito vā micchāpaṭipanno micchāpaṭipattādhikaraṇahetu nārādhako hoti ñāyaṃ dhammaṃ kusalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in the procedure of the skillful teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihino vāhaṃ, bhikkhave, pabbajitassa vā sammāpaṭipadaṃ vaṇṇemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I praise right practice for laypeople and renunciates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihi vā, bhikkhave, pabbajito vā sammāpaṭipanno sammāpaṭipattādhikaraṇahetu ārādhako hoti ñāyaṃ dhammaṃ kusalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the procedure of the skillful teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the right practice? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the right practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihino vāhaṃ, bhikkhave, pabbajitassa vā sammāpaṭipadaṃ vaṇṇemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I praise right practice for laypeople and renunciates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihi vā, bhikkhave, pabbajito vā sammāpaṭipanno sammāpaṭipattādhikaraṇahetu ārādhako hoti ñāyaṃ dhammaṃ kusalan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the procedure of the skillful teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
