<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.032-32. Dutiyapaṭipattisutta  - 32. Practice (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.032. 32. Dutiyapaṭipattisutta  - 32. Practice (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Paṭipattivagga  - 4. Practice </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Micchāpaṭipannañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, sammāpaṭipannañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you one practicing wrongly and one practicing rightly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is practicing wrongly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco micchādiṭṭhiko hoti … pe … micchāsamādhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called one practicing wrongly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is practicing rightly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sammādiṭṭhiko hoti … pe … sammāsamādhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called one practicing rightly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
