<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.039-39. Paṭhamabrahmacariyasutta  - 39. The Spiritual Path (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.039. 39. Paṭhamabrahmacariyasutta  - 39. The Spiritual Path (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Paṭipattivagga  - 4. Practice </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Brahmacariyañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, brahmacariyaphalāni ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the spiritual path and the fruits of the spiritual path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the spiritual path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the spiritual path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni ca, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaphalāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the fruits of the spiritual path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotāpattiphalaṃ, sakadāgāmiphalaṃ, anāgāmiphalaṃ, arahattaphalaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fruits of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni vuccanti, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaphalānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the fruits of the spiritual path.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
