<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.007-7. Dutiyaaññatarabhikkhusutta  - 7. A Mendicant (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.007. 7. Dutiyaaññatarabhikkhusutta  - 7. A Mendicant (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Avijjāvagga  - 1. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha … and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Rāgavinayo dosavinayo mohavinayo’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘the removal of greed, hate, and delusion’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kissa nu kho etaṃ, bhante, adhivacanaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is this a term for?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘rāgavinayo dosavinayo mohavinayo’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nibbānadhātuyā kho etaṃ, bhikkhu, adhivacanaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, the removal of greed, hate, and delusion is a term for the natural principle of extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘rāgavinayo dosavinayo mohavinayo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsavānaṃ khayo tena vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s used to speak of the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the mendicant said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘amataṃ, amatan’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘the deathless’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamaṃ nu kho, bhante, amataṃ, katamo amatagāmimaggo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the deathless? And what is the path that leads to the deathless?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho, bhikkhu, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati amataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo amatagāmimaggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The path that leads to the deathless is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
