<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.048-48. Anupādāparinibbānasutta  - 48. Extinguishment by Not Grasping </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.048. 48. Anupādāparinibbānasutta  - 48. Extinguishment by Not Grasping </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Aññatitthiyapeyyālavagga  - 5. Abbreviated Texts on Followers of Other Paths </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace vo, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṃ puccheyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another path were to ask you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kimatthiyaṃ, āvuso, samaṇe gotame brahmacariyaṃ vussatī’ti, evaṃ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ evaṃ byākareyyātha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverends, what’s the purpose of living the spiritual life with the ascetic Gotama?’ You should answer them like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anupādāparinibbānatthaṃ kho, āvuso, bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ vussatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The purpose of living the spiritual life under the Buddha is extinguishment by not grasping.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace pana vo, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṃ puccheyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If wanderers who follow other paths were to ask you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi panāvuso, maggo, atthi paṭipadā anupādāparinibbānāyā’ti, evaṃ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ evaṃ byākareyyātha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Is there a path and a practice for extinguishment by not grasping?’ You should answer them like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi kho, āvuso, maggo, atthi paṭipadā anupādāparinibbānāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is a path and a practice for extinguishment by not grasping.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, maggo, katamā ca paṭipadā anupādāparinibbānāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is that path, what is that practice for extinguishment by not grasping? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, maggo, ayaṃ paṭipadā anupādāparinibbānāyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the path, this is the practice for extinguishment by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ evaṃ byākareyyāthā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When questioned by wanderers who follow other paths, that’s how you should answer them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatitthiyapeyyālaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Virāgasaṃyojanaṃ anusayaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addhānaṃ āsavā khayā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjāvimuttiñāṇañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupādāya aṭṭhamī. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
