<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.027-27. Kumbhasutta  - 27. Pots </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.027. 27. Kumbhasutta  - 27. Pots </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Micchattavagga  - 3. The Wrong Way </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kumbho anādhāro suppavattiyo hoti, sādhāro duppavattiyo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A pot without a stand is easy to overturn, but if it has a stand it’s hard to overturn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, cittaṃ anādhāraṃ suppavattiyaṃ hoti, sādhāraṃ duppavattiyaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mind without a stand is easy to overturn, but if it has a stand it’s hard to overturn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, cittassa ādhāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what’s the stand for the mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ cittassa ādhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the stand for the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kumbho anādhāro suppavattiyo hoti, sādhāro duppavattiyo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A pot without a stand is easy to overturn, but if it has a stand it’s hard to overturn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, cittaṃ anādhāraṃ suppavattiyaṃ hoti, sādhāraṃ duppavattiyaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mind without a stand is easy to overturn, but if it has a stand it’s hard to overturn.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
