<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.030-30. Uttiyasutta  - 30. With Uttiya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.030. 30. Uttiyasutta  - 30. With Uttiya </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Micchattavagga  - 3. The Wrong Way </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā uttiyo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā uttiyo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Uttiya went up to the Buddha … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha mayhaṃ, bhante, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just now, sir, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pañca kāmaguṇā vuttā bhagavatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Buddha has spoken of the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame nu kho pañca kāmaguṇā vuttā bhagavatā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are they?’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, uttiya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Uttiya! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime kho, uttiya, kāmaguṇā vuttā mayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have spoken of these five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sotaviññeyyā saddā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sounds known by the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānaviññeyyā gandhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smells known by the nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tastes known by the tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, uttiya, pañca kāmaguṇā vuttā mayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation that I’ve spoken of. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, uttiya, pañcannaṃ kāmaguṇānaṃ pahānāya ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble eightfold path should be developed to give up these five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the noble eightfold path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, uttiya, pañcannaṃ kāmaguṇānaṃ pahānāya ayaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed to give up these five kinds of sensual stimulation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchattavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchattaṃ akusalaṃ dhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duve paṭipadāpi ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asappurisena dve kumbho, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhi vedanuttiyenāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
