<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.162-162. Vidhāsutta  - 162. Discriminations </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.162. 162. Vidhāsutta  - 162. Discriminations </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Esanāvagga  - 13. Searches </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vidhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are three kinds of discrimination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Seyyohamasmī’ti vidhā, ‘sadisohamasmī’ti vidhā, ‘hīnohamasmī’ti vidhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One discriminates, thinking that ‘I’m better’ or ‘I’m equal’ or ‘I’m worse’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso vidhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three kinds of discrimination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṃ vidhānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three kinds of discrimination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the noble eightfold path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti … pe … sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāsaṃ kho, bhikkhave tissannaṃ vidhānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ayaṃ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three kinds of discrimination.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Yathā esanā, evaṃ vitthāretabbaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(This should be expanded as in the section on searches.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
