<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>45.001-1. Avijjāsutta  - 1. Ignorance </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">45.001. 1. Avijjāsutta  - 1. Ignorance </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Avijjāvagga  - 1. Ignorance </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Avijjā, bhikkhave, pubbaṅgamā akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā, anvadeva ahirikaṃ anottappaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, ignorance precedes the attainment of unskillful qualities, with lack of conscience and prudence following along. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāgatassa, bhikkhave, aviddasuno micchādiṭṭhi pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An ignoramus, sunk in ignorance, gives rise to wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchādiṭṭhissa micchāsaṅkappo pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view gives rise to wrong thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāsaṅkappassa micchāvācā pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong thought gives rise to wrong speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāvācassa micchākammanto pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong speech gives rise to wrong action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchākammantassa micchāājīvo pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong action gives rise to wrong livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāājīvassa micchāvāyāmo pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong livelihood gives rise to wrong effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāvāyāmassa micchāsati pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong effort gives rise to wrong mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchāsatissa micchāsamādhi pahoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong mindfulness gives rise to wrong immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjā ca kho, bhikkhave, pubbaṅgamā kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā, anvadeva hirottappaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge precedes the attainment of skillful qualities, with conscience and prudence following along. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjāgatassa, bhikkhave, viddasuno sammādiṭṭhi pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A sage, firm in knowledge, gives rise to right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhissa sammāsaṅkappo pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view gives rise to right thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsaṅkappassa sammāvācā pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right thought gives rise to right speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācassa sammākammanto pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right speech gives rise to right action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammantassa sammāājīvo pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right action gives rise to right livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvassa sammāvāyāmo pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right livelihood gives rise to right effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmassa sammāsati pahoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsatissa sammāsamādhi pahotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right mindfulness gives rise to right immersion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
