<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.023-23. Ṭhāniyasutta  - 23. Grounds </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.023. 23. Ṭhāniyasutta  - 23. Grounds </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Udāyivagga  - 3. With Udāyī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kāmarāgaṭṭhāniyānaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppanno ceva kāmacchando uppajjati, uppanno ca kāmacchando bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for sensual greed, sensual desire arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpādaṭṭhāniyānaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppanno ceva byāpādo uppajjati, uppanno ca byāpādo bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for ill will, ill will arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thinamiddhaṭṭhāniyānaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppannañceva thinamiddhaṃ uppajjati, uppannañca thinamiddhaṃ bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for dullness and drowsiness, dullness and drowsiness arise, and once arisen they increase and grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaccakukkuccaṭṭhāniyānaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppannañceva uddhaccakukkuccaṃ uppajjati, uppannañca uddhaccakukkuccaṃ bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for restlessness and remorse, restlessness and remorse arise, and once arisen they increase and grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicikicchāṭṭhāniyānaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppannā ceva vicikicchā uppajjati, uppannā ca vicikicchā bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for doubt, doubt arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgaṭṭhāniyānaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppanno ceva satisambojjhaṅgo uppajjati, uppanno ca satisambojjhaṅgo bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you frequently attend properly on things that are grounds for the awakening factor of mindfulness, the awakening factor of mindfulness arises, and once arisen it’s fully developed. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṭṭhāniyānaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppanno ceva upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo uppajjati, uppanno ca upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you frequently attend properly on things that are grounds for the awakening factor of equanimity, the awakening factor of equanimity arises, and once arisen it’s fully developed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
