<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.011-11. Pāṇasutta  - 11. Living Creatures </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.011. 11. Pāṇasutta  - 11. Living Creatures </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Gilānavagga  - 2. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci pāṇā cattāro iriyāpathe kappenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, living creatures engage in the four postures: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kālena gamanaṃ, kālena ṭhānaṃ, kālena nisajjaṃ, kālena seyyaṃ, sabbe te pathaviṃ nissāya pathaviyaṃ patiṭṭhāya evamete cattāro iriyāpathe kappenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">sometimes walking, sometimes standing, sometimes sitting, sometimes lying down. They do so depending on the earth and grounded on the earth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors depending on and grounded on ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaroti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant develop the seven awakening factors depending on and grounded on ethics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkarotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors depending on and grounded on ethics.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
