<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.076-76. Nirodhasutta  - 76. Cessation </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.076. 76. Nirodhasutta  - 76. Cessation </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Nirodhavagga  - 8. Cessation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nirodhasaññā, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññā kathaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How so? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nirodhasaññāsahagataṃ satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … pe … nirodhasaññāsahagataṃ upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the perception of cessation together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññā evaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how, when the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated, it’s very fruitful and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirodhasaññāya, bhikkhave, bhāvitāya bahulīkatāya dvinnaṃ phalānaṃ aññataraṃ phalaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated you can expect one of two results: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enlightenment in the present life, or if there’s something left over, non-return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitāya, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññāya kathaṃ bahulīkatāya dvinnaṃ phalānaṃ aññataraṃ phalaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">How so? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitā? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nirodhasaññāsahagataṃ satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … pe … nirodhasaññāsahagataṃ upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the perception of cessation together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitāya kho, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññāya evaṃ bahulīkatāya dvinnaṃ phalānaṃ aññataraṃ phalaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect one of two results: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enlightenment in the present life, or if there’s something left over, non-return.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirodhasaññā, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahato atthāya saṃvattati, mahato yogakkhemāya saṃvattati, mahato saṃvegāya saṃvattati, mahato phāsuvihārāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The perception of cessation, when developed and cultivated, leads to great benefit … great sanctuary … great inspiration … great ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññā kathaṃ bahulīkatā mahato atthāya saṃvattati, mahato yogakkhemāya saṃvattati, mahato saṃvegāya saṃvattati, mahato phāsuvihārāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How so? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nirodhasaññāsahagataṃ satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti … pe … nirodhasaññāsahagataṃ upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the perception of cessation together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññā evaṃ bahulīkatā mahato atthāya saṃvattati, mahato yogakkhemāya saṃvattati, mahato saṃvegāya saṃvattati, mahato phāsuvihārāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the perception of cessation, when developed and cultivated, leads to great benefit … great sanctuary … great inspiration … great ease.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirodhavaggo aṭṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asubhamaraṇaāhāre, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭikūlaanabhiratena; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniccadukkhaanattapahānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Virāganirodhena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
