<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.056-56. Abhayasutta  - 56. A Place Without Fear </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.056. 56. Abhayasutta  - 56. A Place Without Fear </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sākacchavagga  - 6. Discussion </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho abhayo rājakumāro yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho abhayo rājakumāro bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Prince Abhaya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pūraṇo, bhante, kassapo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa says this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi hetu, natthi paccayo aññāṇāya adassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is no cause or condition for not knowing and not seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahetu, appaccayo aññāṇaṃ adassanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not knowing and not seeing have no cause or condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi hetu, natthi paccayo ñāṇāya dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no cause or condition for knowing and seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahetu, appaccayo ñāṇaṃ dassanaṃ hotī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing and seeing have no cause or condition.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha bhagavā kimāhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does the Buddha say about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, rājakumāra, hetu, atthi paccayo aññāṇāya adassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Prince, there are causes and conditions for not knowing and not seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahetu, sappaccayo aññāṇaṃ adassanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not knowing and not seeing have causes and conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, rājakumāra, hetu, atthi paccayo ñāṇāya dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are causes and conditions for knowing and seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahetu, sappaccayo ñāṇaṃ dassanaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing and seeing have causes and conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo pana, bhante, hetu, katamo paccayo aññāṇāya adassanāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what is the cause and condition for not knowing and not seeing? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ sahetu, sappaccayo aññāṇaṃ adassanaṃ hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do not knowing and not seeing have causes and conditions?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yasmiṃ kho, rājakumāra, samaye kāmarāgapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati kāmarāgaparetena, uppannassa ca kāmarāgassa nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ na jānāti na passati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s a time when the heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire, without truly knowing and seeing the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi kho, rājakumāra, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo aññāṇāya adassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a cause and condition for not knowing and not seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi sahetu sappaccayo aññāṇaṃ adassanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how not knowing and not seeing have causes and conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, rājakumāra, yasmiṃ samaye byāpādapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati byāpādaparetena … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, there’s a time when the heart is overcome and mired in ill will … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">thinamiddhapariyuṭṭhitena … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">dullness and drowsiness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddhaccakukkuccapariyuṭṭhitena … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">restlessness and remorse … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vicikicchāpariyuṭṭhitena cetasā viharati vicikicchāparetena, uppannāya ca vicikicchāya nissaraṇaṃ yathābhūtaṃ na jānāti na passati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">doubt, without truly knowing and seeing the escape from doubt that has arisen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi kho, rājakumāra, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo aññāṇāya adassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a cause and condition for not knowing and not seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi sahetu sappaccayo aññāṇaṃ adassanaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how not knowing and not seeing have causes and conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko nāmāyaṃ, bhante, dhammapariyāyo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nīvaraṇā nāmete, rājakumārā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These are called the ‘hindrances’, prince.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha, bhagavā, nīvaraṇā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, Blessed One, these are hindrances! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taggha, sugata, nīvaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Indeed, Holy One, these are hindrances! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamekenapi kho, bhante, nīvaraṇena abhibhūto yathābhūtaṃ na jāneyya na passeyya, ko pana vādo pañcahi nīvaraṇehi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Overcome by even a single hindrance you wouldn’t truly know or see, let alone all five hindrances. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo pana, bhante, hetu, katamo paccayo ñāṇāya dassanāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">But sir, what is the cause and condition for knowing and seeing? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ sahetu, sappaccayo ñāṇaṃ dassanaṃ hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do knowing and seeing have causes and conditions?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, rājakumāra, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factor of mindfulness, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvitena cittena yathābhūtaṃ jānāti passati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly know and see with a mind that has developed the awakening factor of mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi kho, rājakumāra, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo ñāṇāya dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a cause and condition for knowing and seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi sahetu, sappaccayo ñāṇaṃ dassanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how knowing and seeing have causes and conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, rājakumāra, bhikkhu … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant develops the awakening factor of investigation of principles... energy... rapture... tranquility... immersion... equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvitena cittena yathābhūtaṃ jānāti passati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly know and see with a mind that has developed the awakening factor of equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi kho, rājakumāra, hetu, ayaṃ paccayo ñāṇāya dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a cause and condition for knowing and seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ sahetu, sappaccayo ñāṇaṃ dassanaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how knowing and seeing have causes and conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko nāmāyaṃ, bhante, dhammapariyāyo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bojjhaṅgā nāmete, rājakumārā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These are called the ‘awakening factors’, prince.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha, bhagavā, bojjhaṅgā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, Blessed One, these are awakening factors! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taggha, sugata, bojjhaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Indeed, Holy One, these are awakening factors! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamekenapi kho, bhante, bojjhaṅgena samannāgato yathābhūtaṃ jāneyya passeyya, ko pana vādo sattahi bojjhaṅgehi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Endowed with even a single awakening factor you would truly know and see, let alone all seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi me, bhante, gijjhakūṭaṃ pabbataṃ ārohantassa kāyakilamatho cittakilamatho, sopi me paṭippassaddho, dhammo ca me abhisamito”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When climbing Mount Vulture’s Peak I became fatigued in body and mind. But this has now faded away. And I’ve comprehended the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sākacchavaggo chaṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhārā pariyāyamaggi, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mettaṃ saṅgāravena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhayo pucchito pañhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gijjhakūṭamhi pabbateti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
