<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.031-31. Paṭhamakusalasutta  - 31. Skillful (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.031. 31. Paṭhamakusalasutta  - 31. Skillful (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Nīvaraṇavagga  - 4. Hindrances </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye keci, bhikkhave, dhammā kusalā kusalabhāgiyā kusalapakkhikā, sabbe te appamādamūlakā appamādasamosaraṇā; appamādo tesaṃ dhammānaṃ aggamakkhāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, whatever qualities are skillful, part of the skillful, on the side of the skillful, all of them are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamattassetaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—satta bojjhaṅge bhāvessati, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkarissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu appamatto satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaroti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a diligent mendicant develop and cultivate the seven awakening factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu appamatto satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkarotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a diligent mendicant develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
