<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.027-27. Taṇhānirodhasutta  - 27. The Cessation of Craving </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.027. 27. Taṇhānirodhasutta  - 27. The Cessation of Craving </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Udāyivagga  - 3. With Udāyī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo, bhikkhave, maggo yā paṭipadā taṇhānirodhāya saṃvattati, taṃ maggaṃ taṃ paṭipadaṃ bhāvetha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should develop the path and the practice that leads to the cessation of craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, maggo katamā ca paṭipadā taṇhānirodhāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the path and the practice that leads to the cessation of craving? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satta bojjhaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā kathaṃ bahulīkatā taṇhānirodhāya saṃvattanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to lead to the cessation of craving? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṃ bahulīkatā taṇhānirodhāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to lead to the cessation of craving.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
