<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.015-15. Dutiyagilānasutta  - 15. Sick (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.015. 15. Dutiyagilānasutta  - 15. Sick (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Gilānavagga  - 2. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā mahāmoggallāno gijjhakūṭe pabbate viharati ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was staying on the Vulture’s Peak mountain, and he was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā mahāmoggallāno tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Nisajja kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ mahāmoggallānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat, went to Venerable Moggallāna, sat down on the seat spread out, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci te, moggallāna, khamanīyaṃ kacci yāpanīyaṃ? Kacci dukkhā vedanā paṭikkamanti, no abhikkamanti; paṭikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no abhikkamo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Moggallāna, I hope you’re keeping well; I hope you’re alright. And I hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ, na yāpanīyaṃ. Bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā abhikkamanti, no paṭikkamanti; abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no paṭikkamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not alright. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, moggallāna, bojjhaṅgā mayā sammadakkhātā bhāvitā bahulīkatā abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Moggallāna, I’ve rightly explained these seven awakening factors. When developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge, to awakening, and to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo kho, moggallāna, mayā sammadakkhāto bhāvito bahulīkato abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo kho, moggallāna, mayā sammadakkhāto bhāvito bahulīkato abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, moggallāna, satta bojjhaṅgā mayā sammadakkhātā bhāvitā bahulīkatā abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven awakening factors that I’ve rightly explained. When developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge, to awakening, and to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha, bhagavā, bojjhaṅgā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, Blessed One, these are awakening factors! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taggha, sugata, bojjhaṅgā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Indeed, Holy One, these are awakening factors!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamano āyasmā mahāmoggallāno bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhahi cāyasmā mahāmoggallāno tamhā ābādhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s how he recovered from that illness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāpahīno cāyasmato mahāmoggallānassa so ābādho ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
