<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.002-2. Kāyasutta  - 2. The Body </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.002. 2. Kāyasutta  - 2. The Body </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Pabbatavagga  - 1. Mountains </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṃ kāyo āhāraṭṭhitiko, āhāraṃ paṭicca tiṭṭhati, anāhāro no tiṭṭhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, pañca nīvaraṇā āhāraṭṭhitikā, āhāraṃ paṭicca tiṭṭhanti, anāhārā no tiṭṭhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the five hindrances are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā kāmacchandassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā kāmacchandassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, subhanimittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is the feature of beauty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent improper attention to that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā kāmacchandassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā kāmacchandassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā byāpādassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā byāpādassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, paṭighanimittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is the feature of harshness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent improper attention to that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā byāpādassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā byāpādassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā thinamiddhassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā thinamiddhassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, arati tandi vijambhitā bhattasammado cetaso ca līnattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is discontent, sloth, yawning, sleepiness after eating, and mental sluggishness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent improper attention to them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā thinamiddhassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā thinamiddhassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā uddhaccakukkuccassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā uddhaccakukkuccassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, cetaso avūpasamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is the unsettled mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent improper attention to that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā uddhaccakukkuccassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā uddhaccakukkuccassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannāya vā vicikicchāya uppādāya, uppannāya vā vicikicchāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, vicikicchāṭṭhānīyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are grounds for doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent improper attention to them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannāya vā vicikicchāya uppādāya, uppannāya vā vicikicchāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṃ kāyo āhāraṭṭhitiko, āhāraṃ paṭicca tiṭṭhati, anāhāro no tiṭṭhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca nīvaraṇā āhāraṭṭhitikā, āhāraṃ paṭicca tiṭṭhanti, anāhārā no tiṭṭhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the five hindrances are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṃ kāyo āhāraṭṭhitiko, āhāraṃ paṭicca tiṭṭhati, anāhāro no tiṭṭhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā āhāraṭṭhitikā, āhāraṃ paṭicca tiṭṭhanti, anāhārā no tiṭṭhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the seven awakening factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā satisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā satisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, satisambojjhaṅgaṭṭhānīyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent proper attention to them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā satisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā satisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, kusalākusalā dhammā, sāvajjānavajjā dhammā, hīnapaṇītā dhammā, kaṇhasukkasappaṭibhāgā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side of dark and bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent proper attention to them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā vīriyasambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā vīriyasambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, ārambhadhātu nikkamadhātu parakkamadhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are the elements of initiative, persistence, and exertion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent proper attention to them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā vīriyasambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā vīriyasambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā pītisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā pītisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, pītisambojjhaṅgaṭṭhānīyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent proper attention to them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā pītisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā pītisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā passaddhisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā passaddhisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, kāyapassaddhi, cittapassaddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is tranquility of the body and of the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent proper attention to that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā passaddhisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā passaddhisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā samādhisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā samādhisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, samathanimittaṃ abyagganimittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are the foundation of serenity and freedom from distraction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent proper attention to them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā samādhisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā samādhisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṭṭhānīyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Frequent proper attention to them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṃ kāyo āhāraṭṭhitiko, āhāraṃ paṭicca tiṭṭhati, anāhāro no tiṭṭhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, ime satta bojjhaṅgā āhāraṭṭhitikā, āhāraṃ paṭicca tiṭṭhanti, anāhārā no tiṭṭhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, the seven awakening factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
