<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.030-30. Udāyisutta  - 30. With Udāyī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.030. 30. Udāyisutta  - 30. With Udāyī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Udāyivagga  - 3. With Udāyī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sumbhesu viharati setakaṃ nāma sumbhānaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sumbhas, near the town of the Sumbhas called Sedaka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā udāyī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Udāyī went up to the Buddha … and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva bahukatañca me, bhante, bhagavati pemañca gāravo ca hirī ca ottappañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How helpful my love and respect for the Buddha have been, and my sense of conscience and prudence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, bhante, pubbe agārikabhūto samāno abahukato ahosiṃ dhammena abahukato saṃghena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For when I was still a layman, I wasn’t helped much by the teaching or the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ bhagavati pemañca gāravañca hiriñca ottappañca sampassamāno agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when I considered my love and respect for the Buddha, and my sense of conscience and prudence, I went forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa me bhagavā dhammaṃ desesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha taught me the Dhamma: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iti rūpaṃ, iti rūpassa samudayo, iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti viññāṇaṃ, iti viññāṇassa samudayo, iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, bhante, suññāgāragato imesaṃ pañcupādānakkhandhānaṃ ukkujjāvakujjaṃ samparivattento ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, while staying in an empty hut, I followed the churning of the five grasping aggregates. I truly understood: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammo ca me, bhante, abhisamito, maggo ca me paṭiladdho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I comprehended the teaching; I acquired the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo me bhāvito bahulīkato tathā tathā viharantaṃ tathattāya upanessati yathāhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When developed and cultivated as I’m living in such a way, it will bring me to such a state that I will understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo me, bhante, paṭiladdho, yo me bhāvito bahulīkato tathā tathā viharantaṃ tathattāya upanessati yathāhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I acquired the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānissāmi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo me, bhante, paṭiladdho, yo me bhāvito bahulīkato tathā tathā viharantaṃ tathattāya upanessati yathāhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When developed and cultivated as I’m living in such a way, they will bring me to such a state that I will understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho me, bhante, maggo paṭiladdho, yo me bhāvito bahulīkato tathā tathā viharantaṃ tathattāya upanessati yathāhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the path that I acquired. When developed and cultivated as I’m living in such a way, it will bring me to such a state that I will understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, udāyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Udāyī! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso hi te, udāyi, maggo paṭiladdho, yo te bhāvito bahulīkato tathā tathā viharantaṃ tathattāya upanessati yathā tvaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For that is indeed the path that you acquired. When developed and cultivated as you’re living in such a way, it will bring you to such a state that you will understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānissasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udāyivaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bodhāya desanā ṭhānā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayoniso cāparihānī; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khayo nirodho nibbedho, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekadhammo udāyināti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
