<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.026-26. Taṇhakkhayasutta  - 26. The Ending of Craving </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.026. 26. Taṇhakkhayasutta  - 26. The Ending of Craving </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Udāyivagga  - 3. With Udāyī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo, bhikkhave, maggo yā paṭipadā taṇhakkhayāya saṃvattati, taṃ maggaṃ taṃ paṭipadaṃ bhāvetha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should develop the path and the practice that leads to the ending of craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, maggo katamā ca paṭipadā taṇhakkhayāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the path and the practice that leads to the ending of craving? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satta bojjhaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā udāyī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Udāyī said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ bhāvitā nu kho, bhante, satta bojjhaṅgā, kathaṃ bahulīkatā taṇhakkhayāya saṃvattantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to lead to the ending of craving?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, udāyi, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ vipulaṃ mahaggataṃ appamāṇaṃ abyāpajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Udāyī, it’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factor of mindfulness, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvayato vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ vipulaṃ mahaggataṃ appamāṇaṃ abyāpajjaṃ taṇhā pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so, craving is given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāya pahānā kammaṃ pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving is given up, deeds are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammassa pahānā dukkhaṃ pahīyati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When deeds are given up, suffering is given up. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ vipulaṃ mahaggataṃ appamāṇaṃ abyāpajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant develops the awakening factor of equanimity, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvayato vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ vipulaṃ mahaggataṃ appamāṇaṃ abyāpajjaṃ taṇhā pahīyati </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so, craving is given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhāya pahānā kammaṃ pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving is given up, deeds are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammassa pahānā dukkhaṃ pahīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When deeds are given up, suffering is given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, udāyi, taṇhakkhayā kammakkhayo, kammakkhayā dukkhakkhayo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, Udāyī, when craving ends, deeds end; when deeds end suffering ends.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
