<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.029-29. Ekadhammasutta  - 29. One Thing </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.029. 29. Ekadhammasutta  - 29. One Thing </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Udāyivagga  - 3. With Udāyī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi, yo evaṃ bhāvito bahulīkato saṃyojanīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya saṃvattati, yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and cultivated like this, leads to giving up the things that are prone to being fettered like the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā kathaṃ bahulīkatā saṃyojanīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya saṃvattanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up the things that are prone to being fettered? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṃ bahulīkatā saṃyojanīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up the things that are prone to being fettered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṃyojanīyā dhammā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the things that are prone to being fettered? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhu, bhikkhave, saṃyojanīyo dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye is something that’s prone to being fettered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etthete uppajjanti saṃyojanavinibandhā ajjhosānā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is where these fetters, shackles, and attachments arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhā saṃyojanīyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ear … nose … tongue … body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etthete uppajjanti saṃyojanavinibandhā ajjhosānā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mano saṃyojanīyo dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind is something that’s prone to being fettered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etthete uppajjanti saṃyojanavinibandhā ajjhosānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is where these fetters, shackles, and attachments arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṃyojanīyā dhammā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the things that are prone to being fettered.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
