<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.008-8. Upavānasutta  - 8. With Upavāna </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.008. 8. Upavānasutta  - 8. With Upavāna </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Pabbatavagga  - 1. Mountains </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca upavāno āyasmā ca sāriputto kosambiyaṃ viharanti ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the venerables Upavāna and Sāriputta were staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā upavāno tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā upavānena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Venerable Upavāna and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ upavānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Upavāna: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jāneyya nu kho, āvuso upavāna, bhikkhu ‘paccattaṃ yonisomanasikārā evaṃ susamāraddhā me satta bojjhaṅgā phāsuvihārāya saṃvattantī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Upavāna, can a mendicant know by investigating inside themselves that the seven awakening factors are well implemented so that they lead to living at ease?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jāneyya kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu ‘paccattaṃ yonisomanasikārā evaṃ susamāraddhā me satta bojjhaṅgā phāsuvihārāya saṃvattantī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They can, Reverend Sāriputta. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satisambojjhaṅgaṃ kho, āvuso, bhikkhu ārabbhamāno pajānāti ‘cittañca me suvimuttaṃ, thinamiddhañca me susamūhataṃ, uddhaccakukkuccañca me suppaṭivinītaṃ, āraddhañca me vīriyaṃ, aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi karomi, no ca līnan’ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">As a mendicant rouses up the awakening factor of mindfulness, they understand: ‘My mind is well freed. I’ve eradicated dullness and drowsiness, and eliminated restlessness and remorse. My energy is roused up, and my mind is sharply focused, not sluggish.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ āvuso, bhikkhu ārabbhamāno pajānāti ‘cittañca me suvimuttaṃ, thinamiddhañca me susamūhataṃ, uddhaccakukkuccañca me suppaṭivinītaṃ, āraddhañca me vīriyaṃ, aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi karomi, no ca līnan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they rouse up the awakening factor of equanimity, they understand: ‘My mind is well freed. I’ve eradicated dullness and drowsiness, and eliminated restlessness and remorse. My energy is roused up, and my mind is sharply focused, not sluggish.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu jāneyya ‘paccattaṃ yonisomanasikārā evaṃ susamāraddhā me satta bojjhaṅgā phāsuvihārāya saṃvattantī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant can know by investigating inside themselves that the seven awakening factors are well implemented so that they lead to living at ease.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
