<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.044-44. Duppaññasutta  - 44. Witless </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.044. 44. Duppaññasutta  - 44. Witless </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Cakkavattivagga  - 5. A Wheel Turning Monarch </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘duppañño eḷamūgo, duppañño eḷamūgo’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘a witless idiot’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, ‘duppañño eḷamūgo’ti vuccatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a witless idiot defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattannaṃ kho, bhikkhu, bojjhaṅgānaṃ abhāvitattā abahulīkatattā ‘duppañño eḷamūgo’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, they’re called a witless idiot because they haven’t developed and cultivated the seven awakening factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ sattannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgassa … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imesaṃ kho, bhikkhu, sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ abhāvitattā abahulīkatattā ‘duppañño eḷamūgo’ti vuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re called a witless idiot because they haven’t developed and cultivated these seven awakening factors.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
