<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.039-39. Rukkhasutta  - 39. Trees </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.039. 39. Rukkhasutta  - 39. Trees </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Nīvaraṇavagga  - 4. Hindrances </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Santi, bhikkhave, mahārukkhā aṇubījā mahākāyā rukkhānaṃ ajjhāruhā, yehi rukkhā ajjhārūḷhā obhaggavibhaggā vipatitā senti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are large trees with tiny seeds and big trunks, which grow up and around other trees as parasites. The trees they engulf break apart, collapse, and fall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca te, bhikkhave, mahārukkhā aṇubījā mahākāyā rukkhānaṃ ajjhāruhā, yehi rukkhā ajjhārūḷhā obhaggavibhaggā vipatitā senti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are those large trees with tiny seeds and big trunks? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assattho, nigrodho, pilakkho, udumbaro, kacchako, kapitthano—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The bodhi, banyan, wavy leaf fig, cluster fig, Moreton Bay fig, and wood apple. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho te, bhikkhave, mahārukkhā aṇubījā mahākāyā rukkhānaṃ ajjhāruhā, yehi rukkhā ajjhārūḷhā obhaggavibhaggā vipatitā senti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the large trees with tiny seeds and big trunks, which grow up and around other trees as parasites. The trees they engulf break apart, collapse, and fall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco kulaputto yādisake kāme ohāya agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito hoti, so tādisakehi kāmehi tato vā pāpiṭṭhatarehi obhaggavibhaggo vipatito seti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, take some gentlemen who have gone forth from the lay life to homelessness, abandoning sensual pleasures. But beset by sensual pleasures that are similar, or even worse, they break apart, collapse, and fall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, āvaraṇā nīvaraṇā cetaso ajjhāruhā paññāya dubbalīkaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmacchando, bhikkhave, āvaraṇo nīvaraṇo cetaso ajjhāruho paññāya dubbalīkaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual desire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpādo, bhikkhave, āvaraṇo nīvaraṇo cetaso ajjhāruho paññāya dubbalīkaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">ill will, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thinamiddhaṃ, bhikkhave, āvaraṇaṃ nīvaraṇaṃ cetaso ajjhāruhaṃ paññāya dubbalīkaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">dullness and drowsiness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaccakukkuccaṃ, bhikkhave, āvaraṇaṃ nīvaraṇaṃ cetaso ajjhāruhaṃ paññāya dubbalīkaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">restlessness and remorse, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicikicchā, bhikkhave, āvaraṇā nīvaraṇā cetaso ajjhāruhā paññāya dubbalīkaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca āvaraṇā nīvaraṇā cetaso ajjhāruhā paññāya dubbalīkaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattime, bhikkhave, bojjhaṅgā anāvaraṇā anīvaraṇā cetaso anajjhāruhā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or parasites of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisambojjhaṅgo, bhikkhave, anāvaraṇo anīvaraṇo cetaso anajjhāruho bhāvito bahulīkato vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṃvattati … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo, bhikkhave, anāvaraṇo anīvaraṇo cetaso anajjhāruho bhāvito bahulīkato vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā anāvaraṇā anīvaraṇā cetaso anajjhāruhā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or parasites of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
