<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>46.007-7. Kūṭāgārasutta  - 7. A Bungalow </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">46.007. 7. Kūṭāgārasutta  - 7. A Bungalow </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Pabbatavagga  - 1. Mountains </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kūṭāgārassa yā kāci gopānasiyo, sabbā tā kūṭaninnā kūṭapoṇā kūṭapabbhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the rafters of a bungalow all slant, slope, and incline to the peak. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant who develops the seven awakening factors slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
