<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.47-47. Duccaritasutta  - 47. Bad Conduct </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.47. 47. Duccaritasutta  - 47. Bad Conduct </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Amatavagga  - 5. The Deathless </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha … and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṃ desetu, yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātiha tvaṃ, bhikkhu, ādimeva visodhehi kusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, mendicant, you should purify skillful qualities starting from the beginning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cādi kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning of skillful qualities? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha tvaṃ, bhikkhu, kāyaduccaritaṃ pahāya kāyasucaritaṃ bhāvessasi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Give up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vacīduccaritaṃ pahāya vacīsucaritaṃ bhāvessasi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manoduccaritaṃ pahāya manosucaritaṃ bhāvessasi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, kāyaduccaritaṃ pahāya kāyasucaritaṃ bhāvessasi, vacīduccaritaṃ pahāya vacīsucaritaṃ bhāvessasi, manoduccaritaṃ pahāya manosucaritaṃ bhāvessasi, tato tvaṃ, bhikkhu, sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāveyyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’ve done this, you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha tvaṃ, bhikkhu, kāye kāyānupassī viharāhi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Meditate observing an aspect of the body internally—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharāhi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, sīlaṃ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya ime cattāro satipaṭṭhāne evaṃ bhāvessasi, tato tuyhaṃ, bhikkhu, yā ratti vā divaso vā āgamissati vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu, no parihānī”ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way, depending on and grounded on ethics, you can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññataro ca pana so bhikkhu arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that mendicant became one of the perfected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
