<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.51-62-51–62. Gaṅgānadīādisuttadvādasaka  - 51–62. Twelve Discourses on the Ganges River, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.51-62. 51–62. Gaṅgānadīādisuttadvādasaka  - 51–62. Twelve Discourses on the Ganges River, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga  - 6. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāvento cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four kinds of mindfulness meditation slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāvento cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant who develops the four kinds of mindfulness meditation slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāvento cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro”ti vitthāretabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four kinds of mindfulness meditation slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṅgāpeyyālavaggo chaṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded for each of the different rivers as in SN 45.91–102.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha pācīnato ninnā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Six on slanting to the east, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cha ninnā ca samuddato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and six on slanting to the ocean; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete dve cha dvādasa honti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these two sixes make twelve, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaggo tena pavuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that’s how this chapter is recited.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
