<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.19-19. Sedakasutta  - 19. At Sedaka </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.19. 19. Sedakasutta  - 19. At Sedaka </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nālandavagga  - 2. At Nālandā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sumbhesu viharati sedakaṃ nāma sumbhānaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sumbhas, near the town of the Sumbhas called Sedaka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, caṇḍālavaṃsiko caṇḍālavaṃsaṃ ussāpetvā medakathālikaṃ antevāsiṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, an acrobat set up his bamboo pole and said to his apprentice Medakathālikā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ehi tvaṃ, samma medakathālike, caṇḍālavaṃsaṃ abhiruhitvā mama uparikhandhe tiṭṭhāhī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Come now, dear Medakathālikā, climb up the bamboo pole and stand on my shoulders.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃ, ācariyā’ti kho, bhikkhave, medakathālikā antevāsī caṇḍālavaṃsikassa paṭissutvā caṇḍālavaṃsaṃ abhiruhitvā ācariyassa uparikhandhe aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Yes, teacher,’ she replied. She climbed up the bamboo pole and stood on her teacher’s shoulders. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, caṇḍālavaṃsiko medakathālikaṃ antevāsiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the acrobat said to Medakathālikā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tvaṃ, samma medakathālike, mamaṃ rakkha, ahaṃ taṃ rakkhissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You look after me, dear Medakathālikā, and I’ll look after you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mayaṃ aññamaññaṃ guttā aññamaññaṃ rakkhitā sippāni ceva dassessāma, lābhañca lacchāma, sotthinā ca caṇḍālavaṃsā orohissāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how, guarding and looking after each other, we’ll display our skill, collect our fee, and get down safely from the bamboo pole.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhikkhave, medakathālikā antevāsī caṇḍālavaṃsikaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Medakathālikā said to her teacher, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na kho panetaṃ, ācariya, evaṃ bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That’s not how it is, teacher! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tvaṃ, ācariya, attānaṃ rakkha, ahaṃ attānaṃ rakkhissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should look after yourself, and I’ll look after myself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mayaṃ attaguttā attarakkhitā sippāni ceva dassessāma, lābhañca lacchāma, sotthinā ca caṇḍālavaṃsā orohissāmā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how, guarding and looking after ourselves, we’ll display our skill, collect our fee, and get down safely from the bamboo pole.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“So tattha ñāyo”ti bhagavā etadavoca, “yathā medakathālikā antevāsī ācariyaṃ avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the way,” said the Buddha. “It’s just as Medakathālikā said to her teacher. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attānaṃ, bhikkhave, rakkhissāmīti satipaṭṭhānaṃ sevitabbaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking ‘I’ll look after myself,’ you should cultivate mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paraṃ rakkhissāmīti satipaṭṭhānaṃ sevitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking ‘I’ll look after others,’ you should cultivate mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attānaṃ, bhikkhave, rakkhanto paraṃ rakkhati, paraṃ rakkhanto attānaṃ rakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Looking after yourself, you look after others; and looking after others, you look after yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, attānaṃ rakkhanto paraṃ rakkhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how do you look after others by looking after yourself? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsevanāya, bhāvanāya, bahulīkammena—</span></p>
<p class="p3">By development, cultivation, and practice of meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, attānaṃ rakkhanto paraṃ rakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, paraṃ rakkhanto attānaṃ rakkhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how do you look after yourself by looking after others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khantiyā, avihiṃsāya, mettacittatāya, anudayatāya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">By acceptance, harmlessness, love, and sympathy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, paraṃ rakkhanto attānaṃ rakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attānaṃ, bhikkhave, rakkhissāmīti satipaṭṭhānaṃ sevitabbaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking ‘I’ll look after myself,’ you should cultivate mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paraṃ rakkhissāmīti satipaṭṭhānaṃ sevitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking ‘I’ll look after others,’ you should cultivate mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attānaṃ, bhikkhave, rakkhanto paraṃ rakkhati, paraṃ rakkhanto attānaṃ rakkhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Looking after yourself, you look after others; and looking after others, you look after yourself.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
