<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.30-30. Mānadinnasutta  - 30. With Mānadinna </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.30. 30. Mānadinnasutta  - 30. With Mānadinna </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sīlaṭṭhitivagga  - 3. Ethics and Duration </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃyeva nidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The same setting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena mānadinno gahapati ābādhiko hoti dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the householder Mānadinna was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mānadinno gahapati aññataraṃ purisaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he addressed a man: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi tvaṃ, ambho purisa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, mister, go to Venerable Ānanda …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ na yāpanīyaṃ. Bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā abhikkamanti, no paṭikkamanti; abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no paṭikkamoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not alright. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpāya cāhaṃ, bhante, dukkhāya vedanāya phuṭṭho samāno kāye kāyānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I experience such painful feelings I meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni cimāni, bhante, bhagavatā pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni desitāni, nāhaṃ, bhante, tesaṃ kiñci attani appahīnaṃ samanupassāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And of the five lower fetters taught by the Buddha, I don’t see any that I haven’t given up.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lābhā te, gahapati, suladdhaṃ te, gahapati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re fortunate, householder, so very fortunate! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgāmiphalaṃ tayā, gahapati, byākatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You have declared the fruit of non-return.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlaṭṭhitivaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlaṃ ṭhiti parihānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhaṃ brāhmaṇapadesaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samattaṃ loko sirivaḍḍho, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mānadinnena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
