<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.48-48. Mittasutta  - 48. Friends </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.48. 48. Mittasutta  - 48. Friends </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Amatavagga  - 5. The Deathless </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca kho sotabbaṃ maññeyyuṃ mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā, te vo, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvanāya samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those for whom you have sympathy, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in the development of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ, catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca sotabbaṃ maññeyyuṃ mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā, te vo, bhikkhave, imesaṃ catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvanāya samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those for whom you have sympathy, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in the development of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
