<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.11-11. Mahāpurisasutta  - 11. A Great Man </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.11. 11. Mahāpurisasutta  - 11. A Great Man </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nālandavagga  - 2. At Nālandā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘mahāpuriso, mahāpuriso’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘a great man’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, mahāpuriso hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a great man defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vimuttacittattā khvāhaṃ, sāriputta, ‘mahāpuriso’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sāriputta, someone whose mind is free is a great man, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avimuttacittattā ‘no mahāpuriso’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If their mind is not free, I say they’re not a great man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, sāriputta, vimuttacitto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does someone have a free mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, sāriputta, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kāye kāyānupassino viharato cittaṃ virajjati, vimuccati anupādāya āsavehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they meditate observing an aspect of the body, their mind becomes dispassionate, and is freed from the defilements by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa dhammesu dhammānupassino viharato cittaṃ virajjati, vimuccati anupādāya āsavehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they meditate observing an aspect of principles, their mind becomes dispassionate, and is freed from the defilements by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, sāriputta, vimuttacitto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone has a free mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttacittattā khvāhaṃ, sāriputta, ‘mahāpuriso’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone whose mind is free is a great man, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avimuttacittattā ‘no mahāpuriso’ti vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If their mind is not free, I say they’re not a great man.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
