<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.13-13. Cundasutta  - 13. With Cunda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.13. 13. Cundasutta  - 13. With Cunda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nālandavagga  - 2. At Nālandā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā sāriputto magadhesu viharati nālakagāmake ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Sāriputta was staying in the Magadhan lands near the little village of Nālaka, and he was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cundo ca samaṇuddeso āyasmato sāriputtassa upaṭṭhāko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the novice Cunda was his carer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto teneva ābādhena parinibbāyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sāriputta became fully extinguished because of that sickness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho cundo samaṇuddeso āyasmato sāriputtassa pattacīvaramādāya yena sāvatthi jetavanaṃ anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāmo yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho cundo samaṇuddeso āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Cunda took Sāriputta’s bowl and robes and set out for Sāvatthī. He went to see Venerable Ānanda at Jeta’s grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āyasmā, bhante, sāriputto parinibbuto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Venerable Sāriputta has become fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa pattacīvaran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is his bowl and robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi kho idaṃ, āvuso cunda, kathāpābhataṃ bhagavantaṃ dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Cunda, we should see the Buddha about this matter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyāmāvuso cunda, yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamissāma; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocessāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Come, let’s go to the Buddha and inform him about this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho cundo samaṇuddeso āyasmato ānandassa paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Cunda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ca ānando cundo ca samaṇuddeso yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Ānanda and Cunda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ, bhante, cundo samaṇuddeso evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, this novice Cunda says that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘āyasmā, bhante, sāriputto parinibbuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Sāriputta has become fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idamassa pattacīvaran’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is his bowl and robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca me, bhante, madhurakajāto viya kāyo, disāpi me na pakkhāyanti, dhammāpi maṃ nappaṭibhanti ‘āyasmā sāriputto parinibbuto’ti sutvā”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since I heard this, my body feels like it’s drugged. I’m disorientated, and the teachings don’t spring to mind.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho te, ānanda, sāriputto sīlakkhandhaṃ vā ādāya parinibbuto, samādhikkhandhaṃ vā ādāya parinibbuto, paññākkhandhaṃ vā ādāya parinibbuto, vimuttikkhandhaṃ vā ādāya parinibbuto, vimuttiñāṇadassanakkhandhaṃ vā ādāya parinibbuto”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, Ānanda, when Sāriputta became fully extinguished, did he take away your entire spectrum of ethical conduct, of immersion, of wisdom, of freedom, or of the knowledge and vision of freedom?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na ca kho me, bhante, āyasmā sāriputto sīlakkhandhaṃ vā ādāya parinibbuto, samādhikkhandhaṃ vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir, he did not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññākkhandhaṃ vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttikkhandhaṃ vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttiñāṇadassanakkhandhaṃ vā ādāya parinibbuto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca me, bhante, āyasmā sāriputto ovādako ahosi otiṇṇo viññāpako sandassako samādapako samuttejako sampahaṃsako, akilāsu dhammadesanāya, anuggāhako sabrahmacārīnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But Venerable Sāriputta was my adviser and counselor. He educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired me. He never tired of teaching the Dhamma, and he supported his spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ mayaṃ āyasmato sāriputtassa dhammojaṃ dhammabhogaṃ dhammānuggahaṃ anussarāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I remember the nectar of the teaching, the riches of the teaching, the support of the teaching given by Venerable Sāriputta.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu taṃ, ānanda, mayā paṭikacceva akkhātaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, did I not prepare for this when I explained that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sabbehi piyehi manāpehi nānābhāvo vinābhāvo aññathābhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">we must be parted and separated from all we hold dear and beloved? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kutettha, ānanda, labbhā. Yaṃ taṃ jātaṃ bhūtaṃ saṅkhataṃ palokadhammaṃ, taṃ vata mā palujjīti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could it possibly be so that what is born, created, conditioned, and liable to fall apart should not fall apart? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, mahato rukkhassa tiṭṭhato sāravato yo mahantataro khandho so palujjeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood, and the largest branch fell off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho ānanda, mahato bhikkhusaṃghassa tiṭṭhato sāravato sāriputto parinibbuto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, in the great Saṅgha that stands with heartwood, Sāriputta has become fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kutettha, ānanda, labbhā. Yaṃ taṃ jātaṃ bhūtaṃ saṅkhataṃ palokadhammaṃ, taṃ vata mā palujjī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could it possibly be so that what is born, created, conditioned, and liable to fall apart should not fall apart? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihānanda, attadīpā viharatha attasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā, dhammadīpā dhammasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Ānanda, be your own island, your own refuge, with no other refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other refuge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, bhikkhu attadīpo viharati attasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo, dhammadīpo dhammasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, bhikkhu attadīpo viharati attasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo, dhammadīpo dhammasaraṇo anaññasaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge. That’s how the teaching is their island and their refuge, with no other refuge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, ānanda, etarahi vā mamaccaye vā attadīpā viharissanti attasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā, dhammadīpā dhammasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā; tamatagge mete, ānanda, bhikkhū bhavissanti ye keci sikkhākāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as their island and their refuge, with no other refuge—those mendicants of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the best.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
