<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.07-7. Makkaṭasutta  - 7. A Monkey </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.07. 7. Makkaṭasutta  - 7. A Monkey </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ambapālivagga  - 1. In Ambapālī’s Wood </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, bhikkhave, himavato pabbatarājassa duggā visamā desā, yattha neva makkaṭānaṃ cārī na manussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in the Himalayas there are regions that are rugged and impassable. In some such regions, neither monkeys nor humans can go, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, himavato pabbatarājassa duggā visamā desā, yattha makkaṭānañhi kho cārī, na manussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while in others, monkeys can go but not humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, himavato pabbatarājassa samā bhūmibhāgā ramaṇīyā, yattha makkaṭānañceva cārī manussānañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are also level, pleasant places where both monkeys and humans can go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, luddā makkaṭavīthīsu lepaṃ oḍḍenti makkaṭānaṃ bādhanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There hunters lay snares of tar on the monkey trails to catch the monkeys. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, ye te makkaṭā abālajātikā alolajātikā, te taṃ lepaṃ disvā ārakā parivajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The monkeys who are not foolhardy and reckless see the tar and avoid it from afar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo pana so hoti makkaṭo bālajātiko lolajātiko, so taṃ lepaṃ upasaṅkamitvā hatthena gaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a foolish and reckless monkey goes up to the tar and grabs it with a hand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha bajjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gets stuck there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Hatthaṃ mocessāmī’ti dutiyena hatthena gaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking to free his hand, he grabs it with his other hand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha bajjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gets stuck there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ubho hatthe mocessāmī’ti pādena gaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking to free both hands, he grabs it with a foot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha bajjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gets stuck there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ubho hatthe mocessāmi pādañcā’ti dutiyena pādena gaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking to free both hands and foot, he grabs it with his other foot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha bajjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gets stuck there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ubho hatthe mocessāmi pāde cā’ti tuṇḍena gaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking to free both hands and feet, he grabs it with his snout. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha bajjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gets stuck there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, makkaṭo pañcoḍḍito thunaṃ seti anayaṃ āpanno byasanaṃ āpanno yathākāmakaraṇīyo luddassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so the monkey, trapped at five points, just lies there screeching. He’d meet with tragedy and disaster, and the hunter can do what he wants with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ, bhikkhave, luddo vijjhitvā tasmiṃyeva kaṭṭhakataṅgāre avassajjetvā yena kāmaṃ pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The hunter spears him, pries him off that tarred block of wood, and goes wherever he wants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ so taṃ, bhikkhave, hoti yo agocare carati paravisaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what happens when you roam out of your territory into the domain of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, mā agocare carittha paravisaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, mendicants, don’t roam out of your own territory into the domain of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agocare, bhikkhave, carataṃ paravisaye lacchati māro otāraṃ, lacchati māro ārammaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you roam out of your own territory into the domain of others, Māra will catch you and get hold of you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno agocaro paravisayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is not a mendicant’s own territory but the domain of others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sotaviññeyyā saddā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sounds known by the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānaviññeyyā gandhā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smells known by the nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tastes known by the tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno agocaro paravisayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is not a mendicant’s own territory but the domain of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gocare, bhikkhave, caratha sake pettike visaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should roam inside your own territory, the domain of your fathers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gocare, bhikkhave, carataṃ sake pettike visaye na lacchati māro otāraṃ, na lacchati māro ārammaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you roam inside your own territory, the domain of your fathers, Māra won’t catch you or get hold of you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko ca, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno gocaro sako pettiko visayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a mendicant’s own territory, the domain of the fathers? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro satipaṭṭhānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno gocaro sako pettiko visayo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a mendicant’s own territory, the domain of the fathers.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
