<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.38-38. Pariññātasutta  - 38. Complete Understanding </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.38. 38. Pariññātasutta  - 38. Complete Understanding </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Ananussutavagga  - 4. Not Learned From Anyone Else </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, satipaṭṭhānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kāye kāyānupassino viharato kāyo pariññāto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so they completely understand the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyassa pariññātattā amataṃ sacchikataṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the body is completely understood they realize the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāsu vedanānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vedanāsu vedanānupassino viharato vedanā pariññātā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so they completely understand feelings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanānaṃ pariññātattā amataṃ sacchikataṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When feelings are completely understood they realize the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Citte cittānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa citte cittānupassino viharato cittaṃ pariññātaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so they completely understand the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittassa pariññātattā amataṃ sacchikataṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the mind is completely understood they realize the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa dhammesu dhammānupassino viharato dhammā pariññātā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so they completely understand principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammānaṃ pariññātattā amataṃ sacchikataṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When principles are completely understood they realize the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
