<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>47.25-25. Aññatarabrāhmaṇasutta  - 25. A Certain Brahmin </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">47.25. 25. Aññatarabrāhmaṇasutta  - 25. A Certain Brahmin </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sīlaṭṭhitivagga  - 3. Ethics and Duration </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bho gotama, hetu, ko paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo na ciraṭṭhitiko hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, Master Gotama, what is the reason why the true teaching does not last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana, bho gotama, hetu, ko paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo ciraṭṭhitiko hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the cause, what is the reason why the true teaching does last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catunnaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, satipaṭṭhānānaṃ abhāvitattā abahulīkatattā tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo na ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, it’s because of not developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn’t last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnañca kho, brāhmaṇa, satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching does last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, brāhmaṇa, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ abhāvitattā abahulīkatattā tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo na ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of not developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn’t last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesañca kho, brāhmaṇa, catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo ciraṭṭhitiko hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching does last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, so brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the brahmin said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
