<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.053-53. Sekhasutta  - 53. A Trainee </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.053. 53. Sekhasutta  - 53. A Trainee </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sūkarakhatavagga  - 6. The Boar’s Cave </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosambiyaṃ viharati ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthi nu kho, bhikkhave, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma sekho bhikkhu sekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘sekhosmī’ti pajāneyya, asekho bhikkhu asekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘asekhosmī’ti pajāneyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, is there a way that a mendicant who is a trainee, standing at the level of a trainee, can understand that they are a trainee? And that a mendicant who is an adept, standing at the level of an adept, can understand that they are an adept?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthi, bhikkhave, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma sekho bhikkhu sekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘sekhosmī’ti pajāneyya, asekho bhikkhu asekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘asekhosmī’ti pajāneyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee, standing at the level of a trainee, can understand that they are a trainee, and that a mendicant who is an adept, standing at the level of an adept, can understand that they are an adept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma sekho bhikkhu sekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘sekhosmī’ti pajānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, sekho bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant who is a trainee truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi kho, bhikkhave, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma sekho bhikkhu sekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘sekhosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sekho bhikkhu iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant who is a trainee reflects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi nu kho ito bahiddhā añño samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā yo evaṃ bhūtaṃ tacchaṃ tathaṃ dhammaṃ deseti yathā bhagavā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Is there any other ascetic or brahmin elsewhere whose teaching is as true, as real, as accurate as that of the Buddha?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi kho ito bahiddhā añño samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā yo evaṃ bhūtaṃ tacchaṃ tathaṃ dhammaṃ deseti yathā bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is no other ascetic or brahmin elsewhere whose teaching is as true, as real, as accurate as that of the Buddha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, bhikkhave, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma sekho bhikkhu sekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘sekhosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sekho bhikkhu pañcindriyāni pajānāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant who is a trainee understands the five faculties: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhindriyaṃ, vīriyindriyaṃ, satindriyaṃ, samādhindriyaṃ, paññindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṅgatikāni yaṃparamāni yaṃphalāni yaṃpariyosānāni. Na heva kho kāyena phusitvā viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And although they don’t have direct meditative experience of their destination, apex, fruit, and culmination, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāya ca ativijjha passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they do see them with penetrating wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, bhikkhave, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma sekho bhikkhu sekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘sekhosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma asekho bhikkhu asekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘asekhosmī’ti pajānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the way that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, asekho bhikkhu pañcindriyāni pajānāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant who is an adept understands the five faculties: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhindriyaṃ, vīriyindriyaṃ, satindriyaṃ, samādhindriyaṃ, paññindriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṅgatikāni yaṃparamāni yaṃphalāni yaṃpariyosānāni. Kāyena ca phusitvā viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have direct meditative experience of their destination, apex, fruit, and culmination, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāya ca ativijjha passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they see them with penetrating wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, bhikkhave, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma asekho bhikkhu asekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘asekhosmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a way that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, asekho bhikkhu cha indriyāni pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant who is an adept understands the six faculties: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Cakkhundriyaṃ, sotindriyaṃ, ghānindriyaṃ, jivhindriyaṃ, kāyindriyaṃ, manindriyaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho cha indriyāni sabbena sabbaṃ sabbathā sabbaṃ aparisesaṃ nirujjhissanti, aññāni ca cha indriyāni na kuhiñci kismiñci uppajjissantī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘These six faculties will totally and utterly cease without anything left over. And no other six faculties will arise anywhere anyhow.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho, bhikkhave, pariyāyo yaṃ pariyāyaṃ āgamma asekho bhikkhu asekhabhūmiyaṃ ṭhito ‘asekhosmī’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is a way that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
