<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.041-41. Jarādhammasutta  - 41. Old Age </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.041. 41. Jarādhammasutta  - 41. Old Age </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Jarāvagga  - 5. Old Age </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito pacchātape nisinno hoti piṭṭhiṃ otāpayamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and sat warming his back in the last rays of the sun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā bhagavato gattāni pāṇinā anomajjanto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and while massaging the Buddha’s limbs he said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cevaṃ dāni, bhante, bhagavato tāva parisuddho chavivaṇṇo pariyodāto, sithilāni ca gattāni sabbāni valiyajātāni, purato pabbhāro ca kāyo, dissati ca indriyānaṃ aññathattaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">how the complexion of your skin is no longer pure and bright. Your limbs are flaccid and wrinkled, and your body is stooped. And it’s apparent that there has been a deterioration in your faculties </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhundriyassa sotindriyassa ghānindriyassa jivhindriyassa kāyindriyassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañhetaṃ, ānanda, hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s how it is, Ānanda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarādhammo yobbaññe, byādhidhammo ārogye, maraṇadhammo jīvite. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When young you’re liable to grow old; when healthy you’re liable to get sick; and when alive you’re liable to die. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ceva tāva parisuddho hoti chavivaṇṇo pariyodāto, sithilāni ca honti gattāni sabbāni valiyajātāni, purato pabbhāro ca kāyo, dissati ca indriyānaṃ aññathattaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The complexion of the skin is no longer pure and bright. The limbs are flaccid and wrinkled, and the body is stooped. And it’s apparent that there has been a deterioration in the faculties </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhundriyassa sotindriyassa ghānindriyassa jivhindriyassa kāyindriyassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvā ca sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhī taṃ jammi jare atthu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Curse this wretched old age, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbaṇṇakaraṇī jare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">which makes you so ugly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāva manoramaṃ bimbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how much this delightful puppet </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarāya abhimadditaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is ground down by old age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yopi vassasataṃ jīve, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even if you live for a hundred years, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sopi maccuparāyaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll still end up dying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kiñci parivajjeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Death spares no-one, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbamevābhimaddatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but crushes all underfoot.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
