<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.058-58. Sūkarakhatasutta  - 58. The Boar’s Cave </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.058. 58. Sūkarakhatasutta  - 58. The Boar’s Cave </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sūkarakhatavagga  - 6. The Boar’s Cave </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate sūkarakhatāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain in the Boar’s Cave. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu kho, sāriputta, atthavasaṃ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatasāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṃ pavattamāno pavattatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sāriputta, considering what benefit does a mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continue to show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anuttarañhi, bhante, yogakkhemaṃ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatasāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṃ pavattamāno pavattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, it is considering the supreme sanctuary that a mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Sāriputta! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuttarañhi, sāriputta, yogakkhemaṃ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatasāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṃ pavattamāno pavattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For it is considering the supreme sanctuary that a mendicant whose defilements are ended, while still alive, continues to show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, sāriputta, anuttaro yogakkhemo yaṃ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatasāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṃ pavattamāno pavattatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is that supreme sanctuary?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhante, khīṇāsavo bhikkhu saddhindriyaṃ bhāveti upasamagāmiṃ sambodhagāmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a mendicant with defilements ended develops the faculties of faith, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyindriyaṃ bhāveti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satindriyaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mindfulness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhindriyaṃ bhāveti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññindriyaṃ bhāveti upasamagāmiṃ sambodhagāmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhante, anuttaro yogakkhemo yaṃ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatasāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṃ pavattamāno pavattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is considering this supreme sanctuary that a mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Sāriputta! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso hi, sāriputta, anuttaro yogakkhemo yaṃ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatasāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṃ pavattamāno pavattatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For this is that supreme sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, sāriputta, paramanipaccakāro yaṃ khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatasāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṃ pavattamāno pavattatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is that utmost devotion that a mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show towards the Realized One or his instructions?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhante, khīṇāsavo bhikkhu satthari sagāravo viharati sappatisso, dhamme sagāravo viharati sappatisso, saṃghe sagāravo viharati sappatisso, sikkhāya sagāravo viharati sappatisso, samādhismiṃ sagāravo viharati sappatisso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a mendicant with defilements ended maintains respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhante, paramanipaccakāro yaṃ khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatasāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṃ pavattamāno pavattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is that utmost devotion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Sāriputta! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso hi, sāriputta, paramanipaccakāro yaṃ khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatasāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṃ pavattamāno pavattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For this is that utmost devotion that a mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show towards the Realized One or his instructions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
