<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.066-66. Dutiyaphalasutta  - 66. Seven Benefits </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.066. 66. Dutiyaphalasutta  - 66. Seven Benefits </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Bodhipakkhiyavagga  - 7. Leading to Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhindriyaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā satta phalā sattānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of developing and cultivating these five faculties, seven fruits and benefits can be expected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta phalā sattānisaṃsā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṃ ārādheti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They attain enlightenment early on in this very life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṃ ārādheti, atha maraṇakāle aññaṃ ārādheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If not, they attain enlightenment at the time of death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce diṭṭheva dhamme aññaṃ ārādheti, no ce maraṇakāle aññaṃ ārādheti, atha pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā antarāparinibbāyī hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters, they’re extinguished between one life and the next … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upahaccaparinibbāyī hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re extinguished upon landing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re extinguished without extra effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re extinguished with extra effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddhaṃsoto hoti akaniṭṭhagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā ime satta phalā sattānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of developing and cultivating these five faculties, these seven fruits and benefits can be expected.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
