<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>48.044-44. Pubbakoṭṭhakasutta  - 44. At the Eastern Gate </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">48.044. 44. Pubbakoṭṭhakasutta  - 44. At the Eastern Gate </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Jarāvagga  - 5. Old Age </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbakoṭṭhake. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in Sāvatthī at the eastern gate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saddahasi tvaṃ, sāriputta—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sāriputta, do you have faith that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in the deathless?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvāhaṃ ettha, bhante, bhagavato saddhāya gacchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, in this case I don’t rely on faith in the Buddha’s claim that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhindriyaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesañhetaṃ, bhante, aññātaṃ assa adiṭṭhaṃ aviditaṃ asacchikataṃ aphassitaṃ paññāya, te tattha paresaṃ saddhāya gaccheyyuṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are those who have not known or seen or understood or realized or experienced this with wisdom. They may rely on faith in this matter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhindriyaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesañca kho etaṃ, bhante, ñātaṃ diṭṭhaṃ viditaṃ sacchikataṃ phassitaṃ paññāya, nikkaṅkhā te tattha nibbicikicchā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But there are those who have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom. They have no doubts or uncertainties in this matter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhindriyaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayhañca kho etaṃ, bhante, ñātaṃ diṭṭhaṃ viditaṃ sacchikataṃ phassitaṃ paññāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikkaṅkhvāhaṃ tattha nibbicikiccho saddhindriyaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have no doubts or uncertainties that the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Sāriputta! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesañhetaṃ, sāriputta, aññātaṃ assa adiṭṭhaṃ aviditaṃ asacchikataṃ aphassitaṃ paññāya, te tattha paresaṃ saddhāya gaccheyyuṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are those who have not known or seen or understood or realized or experienced this with wisdom. They may rely on faith in this matter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesañca kho etaṃ, sāriputta, ñātaṃ diṭṭhaṃ viditaṃ sacchikataṃ phassitaṃ paññāya, nikkaṅkhā te tattha nibbicikicchā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But there are those who have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom. They have no doubts or uncertainties that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānaṃ … pe … paññindriyaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ amatogadhaṃ hoti amataparāyaṇaṃ amatapariyosānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
