<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>49.01-12-1–12. Pācīnādisutta  - 1–12. Sloping East, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">49.01-12. 1–12. Pācīnādisutta  - 1–12. Sloping East, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga  - 1. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“cattārome, bhikkhave, sammappadhānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four right efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ anuppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro sammappadhānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four right efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro sammappadhāne bhāvento cattāro sammappadhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four right efforts slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro sammappadhāne bhāvento cattāro sammappadhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant who develops the four right efforts slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ anuppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro sammappadhāne bhāvento cattāro sammappadhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four right efforts slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṅgāpeyyālavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Sammappadhānasaṃyuttassa gaṅgāpeyyālī sammappadhānavasena vitthāretabbā.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in SN 45.92–102.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha pācīnato ninnā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Six on slanting to the east, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cha ninnā ca samuddato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and six on slanting to the ocean; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvete cha dvādasa honti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these two sixes make twelve, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaggo tena pavuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that’s how this chapter is recited.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
