<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.22-22. Ayoguḷasutta  - 22. The Iron Ball </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.22. 22. Ayoguḷasutta  - 22. The Iron Ball </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Ayoguḷavagga  - 3. The Iron Ball </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhijānāti nu kho, bhante, bhagavā iddhiyā manomayena kāyena brahmalokaṃ upasaṅkamitā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, do you have personal experience of going to the Brahmā realm by psychic power with a mind-made body?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhijānāmi khvāhaṃ, ānanda, iddhiyā manomayena kāyena brahmalokaṃ upasaṅkamitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I do, Ānanda.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhijānāti pana, bhante, bhagavā iminā cātumahābhūtikena kāyena iddhiyā brahmalokaṃ upasaṅkamitā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But do you have personal experience of going to the Brahmā realm by psychic power with this body made up of the four primary elements?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhijānāmi khvāhaṃ, ānanda, iminā cātumahābhūtikena kāyena iddhiyā brahmalokaṃ upasaṅkamitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I do, Ānanda.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yañca kho omāti, bhante, bhagavā iddhiyā manomayena kāyena brahmalokaṃ upasaṅkamituṃ, yañca kho abhijānāti, bhante, bhagavā iminā cātumahābhūtikena kāyena iddhiyā brahmalokaṃ upasaṅkamitā, tayidaṃ, bhante, bhagavato acchariyañceva abbhutañcā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible and amazing that the Buddha is capable of going to the Brahmā realm by psychic power with a mind-made body! And that he has personal experience of going to the Brahmā realm by psychic power with this body made up of the four primary elements!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyā ceva, ānanda, tathāgatā acchariyadhammasamannāgatā ca, abbhutā ceva, ānanda, tathāgatā abbhutadhammasamannāgatā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, the Realized Ones are incredible and have incredible qualities. They’re amazing and have amazing qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, ānanda, samaye tathāgato kāyampi citte samodahati cittampi kāye samodahati, sukhasaññañca lahusaññañca kāye okkamitvā viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and lightness in the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ, ānanda, samaye tathāgatassa kāyo lahutaro ceva hoti mudutaro ca kammaniyataro ca pabhassarataro ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time his body becomes lighter, softer, more workable, and more radiant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, ayoguḷo divasaṃ santatto lahutaro ceva hoti mudutaro ca kammaniyataro ca pabhassarataro ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was an iron ball that had been heated all day. It’d become lighter, softer, more workable, and more radiant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, ānanda, yasmiṃ samaye tathāgato kāyampi citte samodahati, cittampi kāye samodahati, sukhasaññañca lahusaññañca kāye okkamitvā viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and lightness in the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ, ānanda, samaye tathāgatassa kāyo lahutaro ceva hoti mudutaro ca kammaniyataro ca pabhassarataro ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time his body becomes lighter, softer, more workable, and more radiant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, ānanda, samaye tathāgato kāyampi citte samodahati, cittampi kāye samodahati, sukhasaññañca lahusaññañca kāye okkamitvā viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and lightness in the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ, ānanda, samaye tathāgatassa kāyo appakasireneva pathaviyā vehāsaṃ abbhuggacchati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time his body easily rises up from the ground into the air. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhoti—ekopi hutvā bahudhā hoti, bahudhāpi hutvā eko hoti … pe … yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vatteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying himself and becoming one again … controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, tūlapicu vā kappāsapicu vā lahuko vātūpādāno appakasireneva pathaviyā vehāsaṃ abbhuggacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a light tuft of cotton-wool or kapok. Taken up by the wind, it would easily rise up from the ground into the air. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, ānanda, yasmiṃ samaye tathāgato kāyampi citte samodahati, cittampi kāye samodahati, sukhasaññañca lahusaññañca kāye okkamitvā viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and lightness in the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ, ānanda, samaye tathāgatassa kāyo appakasireneva pathaviyā vehāsaṃ abbhuggacchati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time his body easily rises up from the ground into the air. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhoti—ekopi hutvā bahudhā hoti … pe … yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vattetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying himself and becoming one again … controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
