<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.06-6. Samattasutta  - 6. Completely </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.06. 6. Samattasutta  - 6. Completely </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Cāpālavagga  - 1. At the Cāpāla Shrine </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādesuṃ, sabbe te catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past who have completely manifested psychic powers have done so by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādessanti, sabbe te catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the ascetics and brahmins in the future who will completely manifest psychic powers will do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādenti, sabbe te catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are completely manifesting psychic powers do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mental development … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādesuṃ, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the ascetics and brahmins in the past who have completely manifested psychic powers have done so by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādessanti, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the ascetics and brahmins in the future who will completely manifest psychic powers will do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādenti, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are completely manifesting psychic powers do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
