<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.27-27. Paṭhamaānandasutta  - 27. With Ānanda (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.27. 27. Paṭhamaānandasutta  - 27. With Ānanda (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Ayoguḷavagga  - 3. The Iron Ball </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamā nu kho, bhante, iddhi, katamo iddhipādo, katamā iddhipādabhāvanā, katamā iddhipādabhāvanāgāminī paṭipadā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is psychic power? What is the basis of psychic power? What is the development of the bases of psychic power? And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhānanda, bhikkhu anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhoti—ekopi hutvā bahudhā hoti, bahudhāpi hutvā eko hoti … pe … yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vatteti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, take a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again … controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccatānanda, iddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo cānanda, iddhipādo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the basis of psychic power? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, ānanda, maggo yā paṭipadā iddhilābhāya iddhipaṭilābhāya saṃvattati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The path and practice that leads to gaining psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccatānanda, iddhipādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the basis of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā cānanda, iddhipādabhāvanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mental development … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccatānanda, iddhipādabhāvanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the development of the bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā cānanda, iddhipādabhāvanāgāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccatānanda, iddhipādabhāvanāgāminī paṭipadā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
