<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>51.30-30. Dutiyabhikkhusutta  - 30. Several Mendicants (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">51.30. 30. Dutiyabhikkhusutta  - 30. Several Mendicants (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Ayoguḷavagga  - 3. The Iron Ball </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekamantaṃ nisinne kho te bhikkhū bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katamā nu kho, bhikkhave, iddhi, katamo iddhipādo, katamā iddhipādabhāvanā, katamā iddhipādabhāvanāgāminī paṭipadā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, what is psychic power? What is the basis of psychic power? What is the development of the bases of psychic power? And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṃnettikā … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamā ca, bhikkhave, iddhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what is psychic power? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhoti—ekopi hutvā bahudhā hoti … pe … yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vatteti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again … controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, iddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, iddhipādo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the basis of psychic power? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, bhikkhave, maggo, yā paṭipadā iddhilābhāya iddhipaṭilābhāya saṃvattati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The path and practice that leads to gaining psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, iddhipādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the basis of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, iddhipādabhāvanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mental development … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, iddhipādabhāvanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the development of the bases of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, iddhipādabhāvanāgāminī paṭipadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, iddhipādabhāvanāgāminī paṭipadā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
