<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>52.04-4. Paṭhamakaṇḍakīsutta  - 4. At Thorny Wood (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">52.04. 4. Paṭhamakaṇḍakīsutta  - 4. At Thorny Wood (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Rahogatavagga  - 1. In Private </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca anuruddho āyasmā ca sāriputto āyasmā ca mahāmoggallāno sākete viharanti kaṇḍakīvane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the venerables Anuruddha, Sāriputta, and Mahāmoggallāna were staying near Sāketa, in the Thorny Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ca sāriputto āyasmā ca mahāmoggallāno sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhitā yenāyasmā anuruddho tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā anuruddhena saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta and Mahāmoggallāna came out of retreat, went to Anuruddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. Sāriputta said to Anuruddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sekhenāvuso anuruddha, bhikkhunā katame dhammā upasampajja vihātabbā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Anuruddha, what things should a trainee mendicant enter and remain in?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sekhenāvuso sāriputta, bhikkhunā cattāro satipaṭṭhānā upasampajja vihātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, a trainee mendicant should enter and remain in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sekhenāvuso sāriputta, bhikkhunā ime cattāro satipaṭṭhānā upasampajja vihātabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A trainee mendicant should enter and remain in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
