<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>53.45-54-45–54. Oghādisutta  - 45–54 Floods, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">53.45-54. 45–54. Oghādisutta  - 45–54 Floods, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Oghavagga  - 5. Floods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, uddhambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūparāgo, arūparāgo, māno, uddhaccaṃ, avijjā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ uddhambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya cattāro jhānā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The four absorptions should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">third absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ uddhambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ime cattāro jhānā bhāvetabbā”ti vitthāretabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These four absorptions should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Yathā maggasaṃyuttaṃ tathā vitthāretabbaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in the Linked Discourses on the Path at SN 45.171–180.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Oghavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ogho yogo upādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Floods, bonds, grasping, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ganthā anusayena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">ties, and underlying tendencies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaguṇā nīvaraṇā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khandhā oruddhambhāgiyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">aggregates, and fetters high and low. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jhānasaṃyuttaṃ navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on Absorption are the ninth section.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
