<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>53.01-12-1–12. Jhānādisutta  - 1–12. Absorptions, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">53.01-12. 1–12. Jhānādisutta  - 1–12. Absorptions, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga  - 1. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“cattārome, bhikkhave, jhānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four absorptions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca viharati sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṃvedeti, yaṃ taṃ ariyā ācikkhanti: ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro jhānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four absorptions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro jhāne bhāvento cattāro jhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four absorptions slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro jhāne bhāvento cattāro jhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four absorptions slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā … pe … dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">third absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro jhāne bhāvento cattāro jhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four absorptions slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṅgāpeyyālavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded for each of the different rivers as in SN 45.91–102.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha pācīnato ninnā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Six on slanting to the east, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cha ninnā ca samuddato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and six on slanting to the ocean; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvete cha dvādasa honti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">these two sixes make twelve, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaggo tena pavuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that’s how this chapter is recited.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
