<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>54.10-10. Kimilasutta  - 10. With Kimbila </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">54.10. 10. Kimilasutta  - 10. With Kimbila </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ekadhammavagga  - 1. One Thing </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kimilāyaṃ viharati veḷuvane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kimbilā in the Freshwater Mangrove Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ kimilaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Venerable Kimbila, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ bhāvito nu kho, kimila, ānāpānassatisamādhi kathaṃ bahulīkato mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kimbila, how is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so that it is very fruitful and beneficial?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā kimilo tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Kimbila kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ kimilaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time, the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ bhāvito nu kho, kimila, ānāpānassatisamādhi kathaṃ bahulīkato mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so that it is very fruitful and beneficial?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho āyasmā kimilo tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a second time and a third time Kimbila kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etassa, bhagavā, kālo; etassa, sugata, kālo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ bhagavā ānāpānassatisamādhiṃ bhāseyya, bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let the Buddha speak on immersion due to mindfulness of breathing. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tenahānanda, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Ānanda, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ bhāvito ca, ānanda, ānāpānassatisamādhi kathaṃ bahulīkato mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, how is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so that it is very fruitful and beneficial? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, sits down cross-legged, with their body straight, and establishes mindfulness right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So satova assasati, satova passasati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvito kho, ānanda, ānāpānassatisamādhi evaṃ bahulīkato mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, is very fruitful and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ samaye, ānanda, bhikkhu dīghaṃ vā assasanto ‘dīghaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāti, dīghaṃ vā passasanto ‘dīghaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant is breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ When breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rassaṃ vā assasanto ‘rassaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāti, rassaṃ vā passasanto ‘rassaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When breathing in lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing in lightly.’ When breathing out lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing out lightly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sabbakāyappaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘sabbakāyappaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the whole body.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the whole body.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the physical process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the physical process.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāye kāyānupassī, ānanda, bhikkhu tasmiṃ samaye viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyaññatarāhaṃ, ānanda, etaṃ vadāmi yadidaṃ—assāsapassāsaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because the breath is a certain aspect of the body, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihānanda, kāye kāyānupassī bhikkhu tasmiṃ samaye viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ samaye, ānanda, bhikkhu ‘pītippaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘pītippaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a time when a mendicant practices like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing rapture.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing rapture.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sukhappaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘sukhappaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing bliss.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘cittasaṅkhārappaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘cittasaṅkhārappaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the mental processes.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the mental processes.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘passambhayaṃ cittasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the mental processes.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the mental processes.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu vedanānupassī, ānanda, bhikkhu tasmiṃ samaye viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanāññatarāhaṃ, ānanda, etaṃ vadāmi, yadidaṃ—assāsapassāsānaṃ sādhukaṃ manasikāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because close focus on the breath is a certain aspect of feelings, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihānanda, vedanāsu vedanānupassī bhikkhu tasmiṃ samaye viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ samaye, ānanda, bhikkhu ‘cittappaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘cittappaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a time when a mendicant practices like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the mind.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhippamodayaṃ cittaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in gladdening the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out gladdening the mind.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādahaṃ cittaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out immersing the mind in samādhi.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in freeing the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out freeing the mind.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte cittānupassī, ānanda, bhikkhu tasmiṃ samaye viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṃ, ānanda, muṭṭhassatissa asampajānassa ānāpānassatisamādhibhāvanaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because there is no development of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing for someone who is unmindful and lacks awareness, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihānanda, citte cittānupassī bhikkhu tasmiṃ samaye viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ samaye, ānanda, bhikkhu ‘aniccānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a time when a mendicant practices like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing impermanence.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing impermanence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">virāgānupassī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing fading away.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing fading away.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirodhānupassī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing cessation.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing cessation.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī, ānanda, bhikkhu tasmiṃ samaye viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yaṃ taṃ hoti abhijjhādomanassānaṃ pahānaṃ taṃ paññāya disvā sādhukaṃ ajjhupekkhitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having seen with wisdom the giving up of desire and aversion, they watch closely over with equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihānanda, dhammesu dhammānupassī bhikkhu tasmiṃ samaye viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, catumahāpathe mahāpaṃsupuñjo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a large heap of sand at the crossroads. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puratthimāya cepi disāyaṃ āgaccheyya sakaṭaṃ vā ratho vā, upahanateva taṃ paṃsupuñjaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a cart or chariot were to come by from the east, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pacchimāya cepi disāya āgaccheyya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">west, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uttarāya cepi disāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">north, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dakkhiṇāya cepi disāya āgaccheyya sakaṭaṃ vā ratho vā, upahanateva taṃ paṃsupuñjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or south and destroy that heap of sand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, ānanda, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharantopi upahanateva pāpake akusale dhamme; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharantopi upahanateva pāpake akusale dhamme”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or principles, they destroy bad, unskillful qualities.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekadhammavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekadhammo ca bojjhaṅgo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhikañca duve phalā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariṭṭho kappino dīpo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vesālī kimilena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
