<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>54.14-14. Dutiyaānandasutta  - 14. With Ānanda (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">54.14. 14. Dutiyaānandasutta  - 14. With Ānanda (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthi nu kho, ānanda, ekadhammo bhāvito bahulīkato cattāro dhamme paripūreti, cattāro dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta dhamme paripūrenti, satta dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā dve dhamme paripūrentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills four things; and those four things, when developed and cultivated, fulfill seven things; and those seven things, when developed and cultivated, fulfill two things?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthānanda, ekadhammo bhāvito bahulīkato cattāro dhamme paripūreti, cattāro dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta dhamme paripūrenti, satta dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā dve dhamme paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, Ānanda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo cānanda, ekadhammo bhāvito bahulīkato cattāro dhamme paripūreti, cattāro dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta dhamme paripūrenti, satta dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā dve dhamme paripūrenti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is that one thing? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ānāpānassatisamādhi, ānanda, ekadhammo bhāvito bahulīkato cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūreti, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrenti, satta bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrentīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvito cānanda, ānāpānassatisamādhi, kathaṃ bahulīkato cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūreti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu araññagato vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ bhāvitā kho, ānanda, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṃ bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill knowledge and freedom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
