<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>54.20-20. Āsavakkhayasutta  - 20. The Ending of Defilements </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">54.20. 20. Āsavakkhayasutta  - 20. The Ending of Defilements </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“… Āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it leads to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ bhāvito ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatisamādhi kathaṃ bahulīkato saṃyojanappahānāya saṃvattati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up the fetters, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anusayasamugghātāya saṃvattati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">uprooting the underlying tendencies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">addhānapariññāya saṃvattati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">completely understanding the course of time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ending the defilements? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant—gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut—sits down cross-legged, with their body straight, and focuses their mindfulness right there. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmīti sikkhati, paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmīti sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bhāvito kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatisamādhi evaṃ bahulīkato saṃyojanappahānāya saṃvattati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up the fetters, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anusayasamugghātāya saṃvattati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">uprooting the underlying tendencies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">addhānapariññāya saṃvattati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">completely understanding the course of time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ending the defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyo vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Icchānaṅgalaṃ kaṅkheyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ānandā apare duve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū saṃyojanānusayā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">addhānaṃ āsavakkhayanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ānāpānasaṃyuttaṃ dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on Mindfulness of Breathing is the tenth section.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
