<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>54.11-11. Icchānaṅgalasutta  - 11. Icchānaṅgala </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">54.11. 11. Icchānaṅgalasutta  - 11. Icchānaṅgala </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā icchānaṅgale viharati icchānaṅgalavanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in a forest near Icchānaṅgala. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There he addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“icchāmahaṃ, bhikkhave, temāsaṃ paṭisallīyituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for three months. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmhi kenaci upasaṅkamitabbo, aññatra ekena piṇḍapātanīhārakenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No-one should approach me, except for the one who brings my alms-food.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paṭissutvā nāssudha koci bhagavantaṃ upasaṅkamati, aññatra ekena piṇḍapātanīhārakena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except for the one who brought the alms-food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassa temāsassa accayena paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace kho, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṃ puccheyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another path were to ask you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘katamenāvuso, vihārena samaṇo gotamo vassāvāsaṃ bahulaṃ vihāsī’ti, evaṃ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ evaṃ byākareyyātha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverends, what was the ascetic Gotama’s usual meditation during the rainy season residence?’ You should answer them like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ānāpānassatisamādhinā kho, āvuso, bhagavā vassāvāsaṃ bahulaṃ vihāsī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverends, the ascetic Gotama’s usual meditation during the rainy season residence was immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sato assasāmi, sato passasāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this regard: mindful, I breathe in. Mindful, I breathe out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīghaṃ assasanto ‘dīghaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāmi, dīghaṃ passasanto ‘dīghaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When breathing in heavily I know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ When breathing out heavily I know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rassaṃ assasanto ‘rassaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāmi, rassaṃ passasanto ‘rassaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When breathing in lightly I know: ‘I’m breathing in lightly.’ When breathing out lightly I know: ‘I’m breathing out lightly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sabbakāyappaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti pajānāmi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I know: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the whole body.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti pajānāmi, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti pajānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I know: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ I know: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi taṃ, bhikkhave, sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For if anything should be rightly called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyavihāro’ itipi, ‘brahmavihāro’ itipi, ‘tathāgatavihāro’ itipi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘the meditation of a noble one’, or else ‘the meditation of a Brahmā’, or else ‘the meditation of a realized one’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ānāpānassatisamādhiṃ sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s immersion due to mindfulness of breathing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyavihāro’ itipi, ‘brahmavihāro’ itipi, ‘tathāgatavihāro’ itipi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū sekhā appattamānasā anuttaraṃ yogakkhemaṃ patthayamānā viharanti tesaṃ ānāpānassatisamādhi bhāvito bahulīkato āsavānaṃ khayāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For those mendicants who are trainees—who haven’t achieved their heart’s desire, but live aspiring to the supreme sanctuary—the development and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing leads to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū arahanto khīṇāsavā vusitavanto katakaraṇīyā ohitabhārā anuppattasadatthā parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojanā sammadaññāvimuttā, tesaṃ ānāpānassatisamādhi bhāvito bahulīkato diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārāya ceva saṃvattati satisampajaññāya ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For those mendicants who are perfected—who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and are rightly freed through enlightenment—the development and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing leads to blissful meditation in the present life, and to mindfulness and awareness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi taṃ, bhikkhave, sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For if anything should be rightly called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyavihāro’ itipi, ‘brahmavihāro’ itipi, ‘tathāgatavihāro’ itipi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘the meditation of a noble one’, or else ‘the meditation of a Brahmā’, or else ‘the meditation of a realized one’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ānāpānassatisamādhiṃ sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyavihāro’ itipi, ‘brahmavihāro’ itipi, ‘tathāgatavihāro’ itipī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
