<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.52-52. Vassaṃvutthasutta  - 52. One Who Completed the Rains </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.52. 52. Vassaṃvutthasutta  - 52. One Who Completed the Rains </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sappaññavagga  - 6. A Wise Person </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sāvatthiyaṃ vassaṃvuttho kapilavatthuṃ anuppatto hoti kenacideva karaṇīyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a certain mendicant who had completed the rainy season residence in Sāvatthī arrived at Kapilavatthu on some business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṃ kho kāpilavatthavā sakyā: “aññataro kira bhikkhu sāvatthiyaṃ vassaṃvuttho kapilavatthuṃ anuppatto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu heard about this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kāpilavatthavā sakyā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho kāpilavatthavā sakyā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They went to that mendicant, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, bhante, bhagavā arogo ceva balavā cā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, we hope that you’re healthy and well.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Arogo cāvuso, bhagavā balavā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am, good sirs.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci pana, bhante, sāriputtamoggallānā arogā ceva balavanto cā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And we hope that Sāriputta and Moggallāna are healthy and well.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sāriputtamoggallānāpi kho, āvuso, arogā ceva balavanto cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They are.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci pana, bhante, bhikkhusaṅgho arogo ca balavā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And we hope that the mendicant Saṅgha is healthy and well.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhusaṅghopi kho, āvuso, arogo ca balavā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi pana te, bhante, kiñci iminā antaravassena bhagavato sammukhā sutaṃ sammukhā paṭiggahitan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, during this rains residence did you hear and learn anything in the presence of the Buddha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sammukhā metaṃ, āvuso, bhagavato sutaṃ sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good sirs, I heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘appakā te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū ye āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are fewer mendicants who realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho eteva bahutarā bhikkhū ye pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyino anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are more mendicants who, having ended the five lower fetters, are reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparampi kho me, āvuso, bhagavato sammukhā sutaṃ sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In addition, I heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘appakā te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū ye pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyino anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are fewer mendicants who, having ended the five lower fetters, are reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho eteva bahutarā bhikkhū ye tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmino, sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are more mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, are once-returners, who come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparampi kho me, āvuso, bhagavato sammukhā sutaṃ sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In addition, I heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘appakā te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū ye tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmino, sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are fewer mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, are once-returners, who come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho eteva bahutarā bhikkhū ye tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are more mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters are stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
