<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.39-39. Kāḷigodhasutta  - 39. With Kāḷigodhā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.39. 39. Kāḷigodhasutta  - 39. With Kāḷigodhā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Puññābhisandavagga  - 4. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ nigrodhārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena kāḷigodhāya sākiyāniyā nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of Kāḷigodhā the Sakyan lady, where he sat on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kāḷigodhā sākiyānī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho kāḷigodhaṃ sākiyāniṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Kāḷigodhā went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi kho, godhe, dhammehi samannāgatā ariyasāvikā sotāpannā hoti avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Godhā, a female noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, godhe, ariyasāvikā buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatā hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati muttacāgā payatapāṇinī vossaggaratā yācayogā dānasaṃvibhāgaratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, godhe, catūhi dhammehi samannāgatā ariyasāvikā sotāpannā hoti avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A female noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yānimāni, bhante, bhagavatā cattāri sotāpattiyaṅgāni desitāni, saṃvijjante dhammā mayi, ahañca tesu dhammesu sandissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, these four factors of stream-entry that were taught by the Buddha are found in me, and I am seen in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, bhante, buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For I have experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kho pana kiñci kule deyyadhammaṃ sabbaṃ taṃ appaṭivibhattaṃ sīlavantehi kalyāṇadhammehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I share without reservation all the gifts available to give in our family with those who are ethical and of good character.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lābhā te, godhe, suladdhaṃ te, godhe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re fortunate, Godhā, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotāpattiphalaṃ tayā, godhe, byākatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You have declared the fruit of stream-entry.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
