<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.04-4. Paṭhamasāriputtasutta  - 4. With Sāriputta (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.04. 4. Paṭhamasāriputtasutta  - 4. With Sāriputta (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Veḷudvāravagga  - 1. At Bamboo Gate </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca sāriputto āyasmā ca ānando sāvatthiyaṃ viharanti jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Ānanda came out of retreat … and said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katinaṃ nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, dhammānaṃ samannāgamanahetu evamayaṃ pajā bhagavatā byākatā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, how many things do people have to possess in order for the Buddha to declare that they’re a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catunnaṃ kho, āvuso, dhammānaṃ samannāgamanahetu evamayaṃ pajā bhagavatā byākatā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, people have to possess four things in order for the Buddha to declare that they’re a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, āvuso, catunnaṃ dhammānaṃ samannāgamanahetu evamayaṃ pajā bhagavatā byākatā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">People have to possess these four things in order for the Buddha to declare that they’re a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
