<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.53-53. Dhammadinnasutta  - 53. With Dhammadinna </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.53. 53. Dhammadinnasutta  - 53. With Dhammadinna </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sappaññavagga  - 6. A Wise Person </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bārāṇasiyaṃ viharati isipatane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho dhammadinno upāsako pañcahi upāsakasatehi saddhiṃ yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho dhammadinno upāsako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the lay follower Dhammadinna, together with five hundred lay followers, went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ovadatu no, bhante, bhagavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“May the Buddha please advise </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anusāsatu no, bhante, bhagavā yaṃ amhākaṃ assa dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and instruct us. It will be for our lasting welfare and happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātiha vo, dhammadinna, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, Dhammadinna, you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye te suttantā tathāgatabhāsitā gambhīrā gambhīratthā lokuttarā suññatapaṭisaṃyuttā te kālena kālaṃ upasampajja viharissāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘From time to time we will undertake and dwell upon the discourses spoken by the Realized One that are deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, dhammadinna, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train yourselves.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho netaṃ, bhante, sukaraṃ amhehi puttasambādhasayanaṃ ajjhāvasantehi kāsikacandanaṃ paccanubhontehi mālāgandhavilepanaṃ dhārayantehi jātarūparajataṃ sādiyantehi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, we live at home with our children, using sandalwood imported from Kāsi, wearing garlands, perfumes, and makeup, and accepting gold and money. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye te suttantā tathāgatabhāsitā gambhīrā gambhīratthā lokuttarā suññatapaṭisaṃyuttā te kālena kālaṃ upasampajja viharituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy for us to undertake and dwell from time to time upon the discourses spoken by the Realized One that are deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ no, bhante, bhagavā amhākaṃ pañcasu sikkhāpadesu ṭhitānaṃ uttaridhammaṃ desetū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since we are established in the five training rules, please teach us further.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātiha vo, dhammadinna, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, Dhammadinna, you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatā bhavissāma—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will have experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgatā bhavissāma akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And we will have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, dhammadinna, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train yourselves.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yānimāni, bhante, bhagavatā cattāri sotāpattiyaṅgāni desitāni, saṃvijjante dhammā amhesu, mayañca tesu dhammesu sandissāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, these four factors of stream-entry that were taught by the Buddha are found in us, and we embody them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayañhi, bhante, buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For we have experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgatā akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And we have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lābhā vo, dhammadinna, suladdhaṃ vo, dhammadinna. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re fortunate, Dhammadinna, so very fortunate! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotāpattiphalaṃ tumhehi byākatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You have all declared the fruit of stream-entry.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
