<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.28-28. Paṭhamabhayaverūpasantasutta  - 28. Dangers and Threats (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.28. 28. Paṭhamabhayaverūpasantasutta  - 28. Dangers and Threats (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Saraṇānivagga  - 3. About Sarakāni </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder Anāthapiṇḍika: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yato kho, gahapati, ariyasāvakassa pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni ca honti, catūhi ca sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti, ariyo cassa ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho, so ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble cycle with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto; sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, gahapati, pāṇātipātī pāṇātipātappaccayā diṭṭhadhammikampi bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, samparāyikampi bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvediyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in the present life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātā paṭiviratassa evaṃ taṃ bhayaṃ veraṃ vūpasantaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains from killing living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, gahapati, adinnādāyī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who steals … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ, gahapati, kāmesumicchācārī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who commits sexual misconduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ, gahapati, musāvādī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who lies … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ, gahapati, surāmerayamajjappamādaṭṭhāyī surāmerayamajjappamādaṭṭhānappaccayā diṭṭhadhammikampi bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, samparāyikampi bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvediyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who uses alcoholic drinks that cause negligence creates dangers and threats both in the present life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāmerayamajjappamādaṭṭhānā paṭiviratassa evaṃ taṃ bhayaṃ veraṃ vūpasantaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains from alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five dangers and threats they have quelled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four factors of stream-entry that they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo cassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the noble cycle that they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako paṭiccasamuppādaññeva sādhukaṃ yoniso manasi karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple properly attends to dependent origination itself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti, imassuppādā idaṃ uppajjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When this exists, that is; due to the arising of this, that arises. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti imasmiṃ asati idaṃ na hoti, imassa nirodhā idaṃ nirujjhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this doesn’t exist, that is not; due to the cessation of this, that ceases.' That is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadidaṃ avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā, saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is a condition for choices. Choices are a condition for consciousness. Consciousness is a condition for name and form. Name and form are a condition for the six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition that gives rise to old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. When choices cease, consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the noble cycle that they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, gahapati, ariyasāvakassa imāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti, imehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti, ayañcassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho. So ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble cycle with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto; sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
