<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.37-37. Mahānāmasutta  - 37. With Mahānāma </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.37. 37. Mahānāmasutta  - 37. With Mahānāma </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Puññābhisandavagga  - 4. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ nigrodhārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahānāmo sakko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho mahānāmo sakko bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, upāsako hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how is a lay follower defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, mahānāma, buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gato hoti, dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gato hoti, saṅghaṃ saraṇaṃ gato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mahānāma, when you’ve gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā kho, mahānāma, upāsako hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re considered to be a lay follower.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā pana, bhante, upāsako sīlasampanno hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how is an ethical lay follower defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, mahānāma, upāsako pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti, musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, surāmerayamajjappamādaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a lay follower doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā kho, mahānāma, upāsako sīlasampanno hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re considered to be an ethical lay follower.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā pana, bhante, upāsako saddhāsampanno hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how is a faithful lay follower defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, mahānāma, upāsako saddho hoti, saddahati tathāgatassa bodhiṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a lay follower has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, mahānāma, upāsako saddhāsampanno hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they’re considered to be a faithful lay follower.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā pana, bhante, upāsako cāgasampanno hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how is a generous lay follower defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, mahānāma, upāsako vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati muttacāgo payatapāṇi vossaggarato yācayogo dānasaṃvibhāgarato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a lay follower lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā kho, mahānāma, upāsako cāgasampanno hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they’re considered to be a generous lay follower.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā pana, bhante, upāsako paññāsampanno hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how is a wise lay follower defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, mahānāma, upāsako paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when a lay follower is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā kho, mahānāma, upāsako paññāsampanno hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they’re considered to be a wise lay follower.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
