<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.09-9. Dutiyagiñjakāvasathasutta  - 9. At the Brick Hall (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.09. 9. Dutiyagiñjakāvasathasutta  - 9. At the Brick Hall (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Veḷudvāravagga  - 1. At Bamboo Gate </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“asoko nāma, bhante, bhikkhu kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the monk named Asoka has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa kā gati, ko abhisamparāyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where has he been reborn in his next life? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asokā nāma, bhante, bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun named Asokā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asoko nāma, bhante, upāsako kālaṅkato … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the layman named Asoka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asokā nāma, bhante, upāsikā kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the laywoman named Asokā have passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassā kā gati, ko abhisamparāyo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where have they been reborn in the next life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Asoko, ānanda, bhikkhu kālaṅkato āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, the monk Asoka passed away having realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(purimaveyyākaraṇena ekanidānaṃ.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(And all is explained as in SN 55.8) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho so, ānanda, dhammādāso dhammapariyāyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is that mirror of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena samannāgato ariyasāvako ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple who has this may declare of themselves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
