<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.31-31. Paṭhamapuññābhisandasutta  - 31. Overflowing Merit (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.31. 31. Paṭhamapuññābhisandasutta  - 31. Overflowing Merit (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Puññābhisandavagga  - 4. Overflowing Merit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puññābhisandā kusalābhisandā sukhassāhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ paṭhamo puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first kind of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo … pe … paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ dutiyo puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second kind of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako saṅghe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ tatiyo puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third kind of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple’s ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ catuttho puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth kind of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puññābhisandā kusalābhisandā sukhassāhārā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
