<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.17-17. Dutiyamittāmaccasutta  - 17. Friends and Colleagues (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.17. 17. Dutiyamittāmaccasutta  - 17. Friends and Colleagues (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rājakārāmavagga  - 2. A Thousand Nuns </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca sotabbaṃ maññeyyuṃ—mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā—te, bhikkhave, catūsu sotāpattiyaṅgesu samādapetabbā, nivesetabbā, patiṭṭhāpetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in the four factors of stream-entry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesu catūsu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddhe aveccappasāde samādapetabbā, nivesetabbā, patiṭṭhāpetabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siyā, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ mahābhūtānaṃ aññathattaṃ—pathavīdhātuyā, āpodhātuyā, tejodhātuyā, vāyodhātuyā—na tveva buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatassa ariyasāvakassa siyā aññathattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There might be change in the four primary elements—earth, water, fire, and air—but a noble disciple with experiential confidence in the Buddha would never change. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ aññathattaṃ—so vata buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato ariyasāvako nirayaṃ vā tiracchānayoniṃ vā pettivisayaṃ vā upapajjissatī”ti—netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, ‘change’ means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm: this is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Experiential confidence in the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Experiential confidence in the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantesu sīlesu samādapetabbā, nivesetabbā, patiṭṭhāpetabbā akhaṇḍesu … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siyā, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ mahābhūtānaṃ aññathattaṃ—pathavīdhātuyā, āpodhātuyā, tejodhātuyā, vāyodhātuyā—na tveva ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgatassa ariyasāvakassa siyā aññathattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There might be change in the four primary elements—earth, water, fire, and air—but a noble disciple with the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones would never change. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ aññathattaṃ—so vata ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato ariyasāvako nirayaṃ vā tiracchānayoniṃ vā pettivisayaṃ vā upapajjissatīti—netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, ‘change’ means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm: this is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca sotabbaṃ maññeyyuṃ—mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā—te, bhikkhave, imesu catūsu sotāpattiyaṅgesu samādapetabbā, nivesetabbā, patiṭṭhāpetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in these four factors of stream-entry.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
