<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.43-43. Tatiyaabhisandasutta  - 43. Overflowing Merit (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.43. 43. Tatiyaabhisandasutta  - 43. Overflowing Merit (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Sagāthakapuññābhisandavagga  - 5. Overflowing Merit, With Verses </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārome, bhikkhave, puññābhisandā, kusalābhisandā, sukhassāhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ paṭhamo puññābhisando, kusalābhisando, sukhassāhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ catuttho puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth kind of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puññābhisandā kusalābhisandā sukhassāhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi puññābhisandehi kusalābhisandehi samannāgatassa ariyasāvakassa na sukaraṃ puññassa pamāṇaṃ gaṇetuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and goodness, it’s not easy to measure how much merit they have by saying that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettako puññābhisando, kusalābhisando, sukhassāhāro’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho asaṅkhyeyyo appameyyo mahāpuññakkhandhotveva saṅkhyaṃ gacchatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo puññakāmo kusale patiṭṭhito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“One who desires merit, grounded in the skillful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāveti maggaṃ amatassa pattiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">develops the eightfold path for realizing the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammasārādhigamo khaye rato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once they’ve reached the heart of the teaching, delighting in ending, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na vedhati maccurājāgamanasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t tremble at the approach of the King of Death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
