<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.08-8. Paṭhamagiñjakāvasathasutta  - 8. In the Brick Hall (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.08. 8. Paṭhamagiñjakāvasathasutta  - 8. In the Brick Hall (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Veḷudvāravagga  - 1. At Bamboo Gate </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā ñātike viharati giñjakāvasathe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Nādika in the brick house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sāḷho nāma, bhante, bhikkhu kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the monk named Sāḷha has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa kā gati ko abhisamparāyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where has he been reborn in his next life? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandā nāma, bhante, bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun named Nandā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassā kā gati ko abhisamparāyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sudatto nāma, bhante, upāsako kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the layman named Sudatta, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa kā gati ko abhisamparāyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sujātā nāma, bhante, upāsikā kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the laywoman named Sujātā have passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassā kā gati, ko abhisamparāyo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where have they been reborn in the next life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sāḷho, ānanda, bhikkhu kālaṅkato āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, the monk Sāḷha passed away having realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandā, ānanda, bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyinī anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun Nandā passed away having ended the five lower fetters. She’s been reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sudatto, ānanda, upāsako kālaṅkato tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmī; sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The layman Sudatta passed away having ended three fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion. He’s a once-returner; he will come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sujātā, ānanda, upāsikā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The laywoman Sujātā passed away having ended three fetters. She’s a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anacchariyaṃ kho panetaṃ, ānanda, yaṃ manussabhūto kālaṃ kareyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s hardly surprising that a human being should pass away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ tasmiñce maṃ kālaṅkate upasaṅkamitvā etamatthaṃ paṭipucchissatha. Vihesā pesā, ānanda, assa tathāgatassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if you should come and ask me about it each and every time someone dies that would be a bother for me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihānanda, dhammādāsaṃ nāma dhammapariyāyaṃ desessāmi; yena samannāgato ariyasāvako ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Ānanda, I will teach you the explanation of the Dhamma called ‘the mirror of the teaching’. A noble disciple who has this may declare of themselves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca so, ānanda, dhammādāso dhammapariyāyo; yena samannāgato ariyasāvako ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is that mirror of the teaching? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, ānanda, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho so, ānanda, dhammādāso dhammapariyāyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is that mirror of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena samannāgato ariyasāvako ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple who has this may declare of themselves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Tīṇipi suttantāni ekanidānāni.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(The following two discourses have the same setting.)</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
