<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.21-21. Paṭhamamahānāmasutta  - 21. With Mahānāma (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.21. 21. Paṭhamamahānāmasutta  - 21. With Mahānāma (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Saraṇānivagga  - 3. About Sarakāni </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ nigrodhārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahānāmo sakko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho mahānāmo sakko bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṃ, bhante, kapilavatthu iddhañceva phītañca bāhujaññaṃ ākiṇṇamanussaṃ sambādhabyūhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, this Kapilavatthu is successful and prosperous and full of people, with cramped cul-de-sacs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ vā payirupāsitvā manobhāvanīye vā bhikkhū sāyanhasamayaṃ kapilavatthuṃ pavisanto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the late afternoon, after paying homage to the Buddha or an esteemed mendicant, I enter Kapilavatthu. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhantenapi hatthinā samāgacchāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I encounter a stray elephant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhantenapi assena samāgacchāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">horse, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhantenapi rathena samāgacchāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">chariot, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhantenapi sakaṭena samāgacchāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">cart, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhantenapi purisena samāgacchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, tasmiṃ samaye mussateva bhagavantaṃ ārabbha sati, mussati dhammaṃ ārabbha sati, mussati saṃghaṃ ārabbha sati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time I lose mindfulness regarding the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imamhi cāhaṃ samaye kālaṃ kareyyaṃ, kā mayhaṃ gati, ko abhisamparāyo’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If I were to die at this time, where would I be reborn in my next life?’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā bhāyi, mahānāma, mā bhāyi, mahānāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do not fear, Mahānāma, do not fear! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apāpakaṃ te maraṇaṃ bhavissati apāpikā kālaṃkiriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your death will not be a bad one; your passing will not be a bad one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, mahānāma, dīgharattaṃ saddhāparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ sīlaparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ sutaparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ cāgaparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ paññāparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ, tassa yo hi khvāyaṃ kāyo rūpī cātumahābhūtiko mātāpettikasambhavo odanakummāsūpacayo aniccucchādanaparimaddanabhedanaviddhaṃsanadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take someone whose mind has for a long time been imbued with faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. Their body consists of form, made up of the four primary elements, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ idheva kākā vā khādanti gijjhā vā khādanti kulalā vā khādanti sunakhā vā khādanti siṅgālā vā khādanti vividhā vā pāṇakajātā khādanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right here the crows, vultures, hawks, dogs, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures devour it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca khvassa cittaṃ dīgharattaṃ saddhāparibhāvitaṃ … pe … paññāparibhāvitaṃ taṃ uddhagāmi hoti visesagāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But their mind rises up, headed for a higher place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, mahānāma, puriso sappikumbhaṃ vā telakumbhaṃ vā gambhīraṃ udakarahadaṃ ogāhitvā bhindeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a person was to sink a pot of ghee or oil into a deep lake and break it open. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra yā assa sakkharā vā kaṭhalā vā sā adhogāmī assa, yañca khvassa tatra sappi vā telaṃ vā taṃ uddhagāmi assa visesagāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its shards and chips would sink down, while the ghee or oil in it would rise up, headed for a higher place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, mahānāma, yassa kassaci dīgharattaṃ saddhāparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, take someone whose mind has for a long time been imbued with faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. Their body consists of form, made up of the four elements, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ tassa yo hi khvāyaṃ kāyo rūpī cātumahābhūtiko mātāpettikasambhavo odanakummāsūpacayo aniccucchādanaparimaddanabhedanaviddhaṃsanadhammo taṃ idheva kākā vā khādanti gijjhā vā khādanti kulalā vā khādanti sunakhā vā khādanti siṅgālā vā khādanti vividhā vā pāṇakajātā khādanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right here the crows, vultures, hawks, dogs, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures devour it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca khvassa cittaṃ dīgharattaṃ saddhāparibhāvitaṃ … pe … paññāparibhāvitaṃ taṃ uddhagāmi hoti visesagāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But their mind rises up, headed for a higher place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuyhaṃ kho pana, mahānāma, dīgharattaṃ saddhāparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ … pe … paññāparibhāvitaṃ cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your mind, Mahānāma, has for a long time been imbued with faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā bhāyi, mahānāma, mā bhāyi, mahānāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Do not fear, Mahānāma, do not fear! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apāpakaṃ te maraṇaṃ bhavissati, apāpikā kālaṃkiriyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your death will not be a bad one; your passing will not be a bad one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
