<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>55.51-51. Sagāthakasutta  - 51. With Verses </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">55.51. 51. Sagāthakasutta  - 51. With Verses </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sappaññavagga  - 6. A Wise Person </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako sotāpanno hoti avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṃvattanikehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako sotāpanno hoti avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassa saddhā tathāgate, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whoever has faith in the Realized One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acalā suppatiṭṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">unwavering and well grounded; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlañca yassa kalyāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose ethical conduct is good, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantaṃ pasaṃsitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">praised and loved by the noble ones; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe pasādo yassatthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has confidence in the Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujubhūtañca dassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and correct view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaliddoti taṃ āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re said to be prosperous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amoghaṃ tassa jīvitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their life is not in vain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā saddhañca sīlañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So let the wise devote themselves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasādaṃ dhammadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to faith, ethical behaviour, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyuñjetha medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">confidence, and insight into the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saraṃ buddhānasāsanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
