<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.018-18. Vijjāsutta  - 18. Knowledge </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.018. 18. Vijjāsutta  - 18. Knowledge </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dhammacakkappavattanavagga  - 2. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘vijjā, vijjā’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘knowledge’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā nu kho, bhante, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kittāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a knowledgeable person defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, bhikkhu, dukkhe ñāṇaṃ, dukkhasamudaye ñāṇaṃ, dukkhanirodhe ñāṇaṃ, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, vijjā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā ca vijjāgato hotīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how a knowledgeable person is defined. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhu, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
