<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.056-56. Dutiyamahāpathavīsutta  - 56. The Earth (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.056. 56. Dutiyamahāpathavīsutta  - 56. The Earth (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Abhisamayavagga  - 6. Comprehension </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahāpathavī parikkhayaṃ pariyādānaṃ gaccheyya ṭhapetvā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose the great earth was worn away and eroded except for seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ—yaṃ vā mahāpathaviyā parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādinnaṃ, yā vā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā avasiṭṭhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is more: the great earth that has been worn away and eroded, or the seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds that are left?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ mahāpathaviyā yadidaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādinnaṃ; appamattikā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā avasiṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the great earth that has been worn away and eroded is certainly more. The seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds are tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhampi na upenti, upanidhampi na upenti, kalabhāgampi na upenti mahāpathaviyā parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādinnaṃ upanidhāya satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā avasiṭṭhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the great earth that has been worn away and eroded, they can’t be reckoned or compared, they’re not even a fraction.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, for a noble disciple … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
