<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.045-45. Vālasutta  - 45. Splitting Hairs </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.045. 45. Vālasutta  - 45. Splitting Hairs </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Papātavagga  - 5. A Cliff </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya vesāliṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā ānando sambahule licchavikumārake santhāgāre upāsanaṃ karonte, dūratova sukhumena tāḷacchiggaḷena asanaṃ atipātente, poṅkhānupoṅkhaṃ avirādhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He saw several Licchavi youths practicing archery. They were shooting arrows from a distance through a small keyhole, shot after shot without missing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvānassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he saw this he thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sikkhitā vatime licchavikumārakā, susikkhitā vatime licchavikumārakā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These Licchavi youths really are trained, so well trained, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yatra hi nāma dūratova sukhumena tāḷacchiggaḷena asanaṃ atipātessanti poṅkhānupoṅkhaṃ avirādhitan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in that they shoot arrows from a distance through a small keyhole, shot after shot without missing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando vesāliṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Ānanda wandered for alms in Vesālī. After the meal, on his return from alms-round, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idhāhaṃ, bhante, pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya vesāliṃ piṇḍāya pāvisiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, sambahule licchavikumārake santhāgāre upāsanaṃ karonte dūratova sukhumena tāḷacchiggaḷena asanaṃ atipātente poṅkhānupoṅkhaṃ avirādhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna me etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sikkhitā vatime licchavikumārakā, susikkhitā vatime licchavikumārakā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yatra hi nāma dūratova sukhumena tāḷacchiggaḷena asanaṃ atipātessanti poṅkhānupoṅkhaṃ avirādhitan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, ānanda, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, Ānanda? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho dukkarataraṃ vā durabhisambhavataraṃ vā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is harder and more challenging: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo dūratova sukhumena tāḷacchiggaḷena asanaṃ atipāteyya poṅkhānupoṅkhaṃ avirādhitaṃ, yo vā sattadhā bhinnassa vālassa koṭiyā koṭiṃ paṭivijjheyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">to shoot arrows from a distance through a small keyhole, shot after shot without missing? Or to take a horsehair split into seven strands and penetrate one tip with another tip?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadeva, bhante, dukkaratarañceva durabhisambhavatarañca yo vā sattadhā bhinnassa vālassa koṭiyā koṭiṃ paṭivijjheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s more difficult and challenging, sir, to take a horsehair split into seven strands and penetrate one tip with another tip.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atha kho, ānanda, duppaṭivijjhataraṃ paṭivijjhanti, ye ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ paṭivijjhanti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ paṭivijjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Still, Ānanda, those who truly penetrate suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path penetrate something tougher than that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihānanda, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
