<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.043-43. Mahāpariḷāhasutta  - 43. The Mighty Fever </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.043. 43. Mahāpariḷāhasutta  - 43. The Mighty Fever </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Papātavagga  - 5. A Cliff </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, bhikkhave, mahāpariḷāho nāma nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there is a hell called ‘The Mighty Fever’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha yaṃ kiñci cakkhunā rūpaṃ passati, aniṭṭharūpaññeva passati no iṭṭharūpaṃ; akantarūpaññeva passati no kantarūpaṃ; amanāparūpaññeva passati no manāparūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There, whatever sight you see with your eye is unlikable, not likable; undesirable, not desirable; unpleasant, not pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kiñci sotena saddaṃ suṇāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever sound you hear … Whatever odor you smell … Whatever flavor you taste … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever touch you feel … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci manasā dhammaṃ vijānāti, aniṭṭharūpaññeva vijānāti no iṭṭharūpaṃ; akantarūpaññeva vijānāti no kantarūpaṃ; amanāparūpaññeva vijānāti no manāparūpan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever thought you know with your mind is unlikable, not likable; undesirable, not desirable; unpleasant, not pleasant.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahā vata so, bhante, pariḷāho, sumahā vata so, bhante, pariḷāho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, that fever really is mighty, so very mighty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi nu kho, bhante, etamhā pariḷāhā añño pariḷāho mahantataro ceva bhayānakataro cā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is there any other fever more mighty and terrifying than this one?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi kho, bhikkhu, etamhā pariḷāhā añño pariḷāho mahantataro ca bhayānakataro cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, mendicant.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo pana, bhante, etamhā pariḷāhā añño pariḷāho mahantataro ca bhayānakataro cā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what is it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, te jātisaṃvattanikesu saṅkhāresu abhiramanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhiratā … pe … abhisaṅkharonti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They continue to make such choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhisaṅkharitvā jātipariḷāhenapi pariḍayhanti, jarāpariḷāhenapi pariḍayhanti, maraṇapariḷāhenapi pariḍayhanti, sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsapariḷāhenapi pariḍayhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having made such choices, they burn with the fever of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te na parimuccanti jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Na parimuccanti dukkhasmā’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re not freed from suffering, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te jātisaṃvattanikesu saṅkhāresu nābhiramanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anabhiratā … pe … nābhisaṅkharonti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They stop making such choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anabhisaṅkharitvā jātipariḷāhenapi na pariḍayhanti, jarāpariḷāhenapi na pariḍayhanti, maraṇapariḷāhenapi na pariḍayhanti, sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsapariḷāhenapi na pariḍayhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having stopped making such choices, they don’t burn with the fever of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te parimuccanti jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Parimuccanti dukkhasmā’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re freed from suffering, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
