<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.019-19. Saṅkāsanasutta  - 19. Expressions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.019. 19. Saṅkāsanasutta  - 19. Expressions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dhammacakkappavattanavagga  - 2. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Idaṃ dukkhaṃ ariyasaccan’ti, bhikkhave, mayā paññattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I’ve declared: ‘This is the noble truth of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha aparimāṇā vaṇṇā aparimāṇā byañjanā aparimāṇā saṅkāsanā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are limitless explanations, phrases, and expressions about that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipidaṃ dukkhaṃ ariyasaccan’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is another way of saying that this is the noble truth of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ dukkhasamudayaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve declared: ‘This is the noble truth of the origin of suffering.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ dukkhanirodhaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve declared: ‘This is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccan’ti, bhikkhave, mayā paññattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve declared: ‘This is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha aparimāṇā vaṇṇā aparimāṇā byañjanā aparimāṇā saṅkāsanā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are limitless explanations, phrases, and expressions about that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipidaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is another way of saying that this is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
