<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.035-35. Sattisatasutta  - 35. A Hundred Spears </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.035. 35. Sattisatasutta  - 35. A Hundred Spears </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sīsapāvanavagga  - 4. In a Rosewood Forest </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso vassasatāyuko vassasatajīvī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose there was a man with a lifespan of a hundred years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And someone might say to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ehambho purisa, pubbaṇhasamayaṃ taṃ sattisatena hanissanti, majjhanhikasamayaṃ sattisatena hanissanti, sāyanhasamayaṃ sattisatena hanissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Come now, my good man, they’ll strike you with a hundred spears in the morning, at midday, and in the late afternoon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho tvaṃ, ambho purisa, divase divase tīhi tīhi sattisatehi haññamāno vassasatāyuko vassasatajīvī vassasatassa accayena anabhisametāni cattāri ariyasaccāni abhisamessasī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you’ll live for a hundred years being struck with three hundred spears every day. But when a hundred years have passed, you will comprehend the four noble truths for the first time.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthavasikena, bhikkhave, kulaputtena alaṃ upagantuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For an earnest and gentleman this is sufficient reason to submit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Transmigration has no known beginning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbā koṭi nappaññāyati sattippahārānaṃ asippahārānaṃ usuppahārānaṃ pharasuppahārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No first point is found of blows by spears, swords, arrows, and axes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcetaṃ, bhikkhave, assa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now this may be so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho panāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saha dukkhena, saha domanassena catunnaṃ ariyasaccānaṃ abhisamayaṃ vadāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the comprehension of the four noble truths doesn’t come with pain or sadness, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api cāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sahāva sukhena, sahāva somanassena catunnaṃ ariyasaccānaṃ abhisamayaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, the comprehension of the four noble truths comes only with pleasure and happiness, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhassa ariyasaccassa … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ariyasaccassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
