<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.030-30. Gavampatisutta  - 30. With Gavampati </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.030. 30. Gavampatisutta  - 30. With Gavampati </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Koṭigāmavagga  - 3. At the Village of Koṭi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ sambahulā therā bhikkhū cetesu viharanti sahañcanike. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time several mendicants were staying in the land of the Cetis at Sahajāti. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulānaṃ therānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantānaṃ maṇḍalamāḷe sannisinnānaṃ sannipatitānaṃ ayamantarākathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time, after the meal, on return from alms-round, several senior mendicants sat together in the pavilion and this discussion came up among them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo nu kho, āvuso, dukkhaṃ passati dukkhasamudayampi so passati, dukkhanirodhampi passati, dukkhanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadampi passatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, does someone who sees suffering also see the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā gavampati thero bhikkhū etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they said this, Venerable Gavampati said to those senior mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sammukhā metaṃ, āvuso, bhagavato sutaṃ, sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ passati dukkhasamudayampi so passati, dukkhanirodhampi passati, dukkhanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadampi passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Someone who sees suffering also sees the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dukkhasamudayaṃ passati dukkhampi so passati, dukkhanirodhampi passati, dukkhanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadampi passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who sees the origin of suffering also sees suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dukkhanirodhaṃ passati dukkhampi so passati, dukkhasamudayampi passati, dukkhanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadampi passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who sees the cessation of suffering also sees suffering, the origin of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dukkhanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ passati dukkhampi so passati, dukkhasamudayampi passati, dukkhanirodhampi passatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who sees the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering also sees suffering, the origin of suffering, and the cessation of suffering.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Koṭigāmavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve vajjī sammāsambuddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">arahaṃ āsavakkhayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mittaṃ tathā ca loko ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariññeyyaṃ gavampatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
