<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>56.034-34. Celasutta  - 34. Clothes </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">56.034. 34. Celasutta  - 34. Clothes </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sīsapāvanavagga  - 4. In a Rosewood Forest </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āditte, bhikkhave, cele vā sīse vā kimassa karaṇīyan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if your clothes or head were on fire, what would you do about it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āditte, bhante, cele vā sīse vā, tasseva celassa vā sīsassa vā nibbāpanāya adhimatto chando ca vāyāmo ca ussāho ca ussoḷhī ca appaṭivānī ca sati ca sampajaññañca karaṇīyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, if our clothes or head were on fire, we’d apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness in order to extinguish it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ādittaṃ, bhikkhave, celaṃ vā sīsaṃ vā ajjhupekkhitvā amanasikaritvā anabhisametānaṃ catunnaṃ ariyasaccānaṃ yathābhūtaṃ abhisamayāya adhimatto chando ca vāyāmo ca ussāho ca ussoḷhī ca appaṭivānī ca sati ca sampajaññañca karaṇīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, regarding your burning head or clothes with equanimity, not paying attention to them, you should apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness to truly comprehending the four noble truths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhassa ariyasaccassa … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ariyasaccassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should practice meditation …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
