<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.50-50. Dutiyaariyasāvakasutta  - 50. A Noble Disciple (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.50. 50. Dutiyaariyasāvakasutta  - 50. A Noble Disciple (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Gahapativagga  - 5. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na, bhikkhave, sutavato ariyasāvakassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a learned noble disciple doesn’t think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kiṃ nu kho kismiṃ sati kiṃ hoti, kissuppādā kiṃ uppajjati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When what exists, what is? Due to the arising of what, what arises? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kismiṃ sati saṅkhārā honti, kismiṃ sati viññāṇaṃ hoti, kismiṃ sati nāmarūpaṃ hoti, kismiṃ sati saḷāyatanaṃ hoti, kismiṃ sati phasso hoti, kismiṃ sati vedanā hoti, kismiṃ sati taṇhā hoti, kismiṃ sati upādānaṃ hoti, kismiṃ sati bhavo hoti, kismiṃ sati jāti hoti, kismiṃ sati jarāmaraṇaṃ hotī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When what exists do choices come to be? When what exists does consciousness come to be? When what exists do name and form … the six sense fields … contact … feeling … craving … grasping … continued existence … rebirth … old age and death come to be?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sutavato ariyasāvakassa aparappaccayā ñāṇamevettha hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, a learned noble disciple has only knowledge about this that is independent of others: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti, imassuppādā idaṃ uppajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When this exists, that is; due to the arising of this, that arises. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya sati saṅkhārā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance exists, choices come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu sati viññāṇaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When choices exist consciousness comes to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe sati nāmarūpaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness exists name and form come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpe sati saḷāyatanaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form exist the six sense fields come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatane sati phasso hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the six sense fields exist contact comes to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phasse sati vedanā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact exists feeling comes to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāya sati taṇhā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When feeling exists craving comes to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhāya sati upādānaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving exists grasping comes to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādāne sati bhavo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When grasping exists continued existence comes to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhave sati jāti hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When continued existence exists rebirth comes to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātiyā sati jarāmaraṇaṃ hotī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When rebirth exists old age and death come to be.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evamayaṃ loko samudayatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the origin of the world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, sutavato ariyasāvakassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A learned noble disciple doesn’t think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kiṃ nu kho kismiṃ asati kiṃ na hoti, kissa nirodhā kiṃ nirujjhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When what doesn’t exist, what is not? Due to the cessation of what, what ceases? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kismiṃ asati saṅkhārā na honti, kismiṃ asati viññāṇaṃ na hoti, kismiṃ asati nāmarūpaṃ na hoti, kismiṃ asati saḷāyatanaṃ na hoti, kismiṃ asati phasso na hoti, kismiṃ asati vedanā na hoti, kismiṃ asati taṇhā na hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When what doesn’t exist do choices not come to be? When what doesn’t exist does consciousness not come to be? When what doesn’t exist do name and form … the six sense fields … contact … feeling … craving … grasping … continued existence … rebirth … old age and death not come to be?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavo … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kismiṃ asati jarāmaraṇaṃ na hotī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sutavato ariyasāvakassa aparappaccayā ñāṇamevettha hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, a learned noble disciple has only knowledge about this that is independent of others: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imasmiṃ asati idaṃ na hoti, imassa nirodhā idaṃ nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When this doesn’t exist, that is not; due to the cessation of this, that ceases. That is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya asati saṅkhārā na honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance doesn’t exists, choices don’t come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu asati viññāṇaṃ na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When choices don’t exist consciousness doesn’t come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe asati nāmarūpaṃ na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness doesn’t exist name and form don’t come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpe asati saḷāyatanaṃ na hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form don’t exist the six sense fields don’t come to be. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātiyā asati jarāmaraṇaṃ na hotī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When rebirth doesn’t exist old age and death don’t come to be.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evamayaṃ loko nirujjhatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the cessation of the world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako evaṃ lokassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako diṭṭhisampanno itipi, dassanasampanno itipi, āgato imaṃ saddhammaṃ itipi, passati imaṃ saddhammaṃ itipi, sekkhena ñāṇena samannāgato itipi, sekkhāya vijjāya samannāgato itipi, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno itipi, ariyo nibbedhikapañño itipi, amatadvāraṃ āhacca tiṭṭhati itipī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple comes to understand the world, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. Such a noble disciple is called ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a trainee’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and ‘one who stands pushing open the door of the deathless’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapativaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve pañcaverabhayā vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhaṃ loko ca ñātikaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataraṃ jāṇussoṇi ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lokāyatikena aṭṭhamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve ariyasāvakā vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaggo tena pavuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
