<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.57-57. Taruṇarukkhasutta  - 57. A Sapling </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.57. 57. Taruṇarukkhasutta  - 57. A Sapling </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Dukkhavagga  - 6. Suffering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saṃyojaniyesu, bhikkhave, dhammesu assādānupassino viharato taṇhā pavaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a condition for grasping. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, taruṇo rukkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a sapling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa puriso kālena kālaṃ mūlāni palimajjeyya kālena kālaṃ paṃsuṃ dadeyya, kālena kālaṃ udakaṃ dadeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And from time to time someone would clear around the roots, supply soil, and water it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, taruṇo rukkho tadāhāro tadupādāno vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fueled and sustained in this way the sapling would grow, increase, and mature. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, saṃyojaniyesu dhammesu assādānupassino viharato taṇhā pavaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a condition for grasping. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojaniyesu, bhikkhave, dhammesu ādīnavānupassino viharato taṇhā nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving ceases, grasping ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, taruṇo rukkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a sapling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha puriso āgaccheyya kuddālapiṭakaṃ ādāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a person comes along with a spade and basket. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nadiyā vā sīghasotāya pavāheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d cut the sapling apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into little bits. They’d dry the bits in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to ashes. Then they’d winnow the ashes in a strong wind, or float them away down a swift stream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, taruṇo rukkho ucchinnamūlo assa tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the sapling is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, saṃyojaniyesu dhammesu ādīnavānupassino viharato taṇhā nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving ceases, grasping ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
