<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.01-1. Paṭiccasamuppādasutta  - 1. Dependent Origination </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.01. 1. Paṭiccasamuppādasutta  - 1. Dependent Origination </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Buddhavagga  - 1. The Buddhas </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭiccasamuppādaṃ vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you dependent origination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhikkhave, paṭiccasamuppādo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what is dependent origination? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāpaccayā, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is a condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a condition for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is a condition for name and form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The six sense fields are conditions for contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassapaccayā vedanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contact is a condition for feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāpaccayā taṇhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling is a condition for craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a condition for grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānapaccayā bhavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Grasping is a condition for continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavapaccayā jāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, paṭiccasamuppādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called dependent origination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When choices cease, consciousness ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇanirodhā nāmarūpanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpanirodhā saḷāyatananirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatananirodhā phassanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassanirodhā vedanānirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact ceases, feeling ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanānirodhā taṇhānirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When feeling ceases, craving ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving ceases, grasping ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavanirodhā jātinirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇaṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā nirujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
