<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.39-39. Dutiyacetanāsutta  - 39. Intention (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.39. 39. Dutiyacetanāsutta  - 39. Intention (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Kaḷārakhattiyavagga  - 4. Kaḷāra the Aristocrat </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yañca, bhikkhave, ceteti yañca pakappeti yañca anuseti, ārammaṇametaṃ hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, what you intend or plan, and what you have underlying tendencies for become a support for the continuation of consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārammaṇe sati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this support exists, consciousness becomes established. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ patiṭṭhite viññāṇe virūḷhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness is established, name and form are conceived. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The six sense fields are conditions for contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassapaccayā vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contact is a condition for feeling. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarāmaraṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">old age and death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce, bhikkhave, ceteti no ce pakappeti, atha ce anuseti, ārammaṇametaṃ hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t intend or plan, but still have underlying tendencies, this becomes a support for the continuation of consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārammaṇe sati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this support exists, consciousness becomes established. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ patiṭṭhite viññāṇe virūḷhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness is established, name and form are conceived. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, no ceva ceteti no ca pakappeti no ca anuseti, ārammaṇametaṃ na hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t intend or plan or have underlying tendencies, this doesn’t become a support for the continuation of consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārammaṇe asati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With no support, consciousness is not established. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadappatiṭṭhite viññāṇe avirūḷhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness is not established, name and form are not conceived. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpanirodhā saḷāyatananirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
