<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.22-22. Dutiyadasabalasutta  - 22. The Ten Powers (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.22. 22. Dutiyadasabalasutta  - 22. The Ten Powers (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Dasabalavagga  - 3. The Ten Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasabalasamannāgato, bhikkhave, tathāgato catūhi ca vesārajjehi samannāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a Realized One has ten powers and four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iti rūpaṃ iti rūpassa samudayo iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vedanā iti vedanāya samudayo iti vedanāya atthaṅgamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is feeling, such is the origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saññā iti saññāya samudayo iti saññāya atthaṅgamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is perception, such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saṅkhārā iti saṅkhārānaṃ samudayo iti saṅkhārānaṃ atthaṅgamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the ending of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti viññāṇaṃ iti viññāṇassa samudayo iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti, imassuppādā idaṃ uppajjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this exists, that is; due to the arising of this, that arises. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imasmiṃ asati idaṃ na hoti imassa nirodhā idaṃ nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this doesn’t exist, that is not; due to the cessation of this, that ceases. That is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadidaṃ avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is a condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a condition for consciousness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ svākkhāto, bhikkhave, mayā dhammo uttāno vivaṭo pakāsito chinnapilotiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the teaching has been well explained by me, made clear, opened, illuminated, and stripped of patchwork. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ svākkhāte kho, bhikkhave, mayā dhamme uttāne vivaṭe pakāsite chinnapilotike alameva saddhāpabbajitena kulaputtena vīriyaṃ ārabhituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just this much is quite enough for someone who has gone forth out of faith from a good family to rouse up their energy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kāmaṃ taco ca nhāru ca aṭṭhi ca avasissatu, sarīre upassussatu maṃsalohitaṃ. Yaṃ taṃ purisathāmena purisavīriyena purisaparakkamena pattabbaṃ, na taṃ apāpuṇitvā vīriyassa saṇṭhānaṃ bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Gladly, let only skin, sinews, and tendons remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body! I will not stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by manly strength, energy, and vigor.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ, bhikkhave, kusīto viharati vokiṇṇo pāpakehi akusalehi dhammehi, mahantañca sadatthaṃ parihāpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lazy person lives in suffering, mixed up with bad, unskillful qualities, and ruins a great deal of their own good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraddhavīriyo ca kho, bhikkhave, sukhaṃ viharati pavivitto pāpakehi akusalehi dhammehi, mahantañca sadatthaṃ paripūreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An energetic person lives happily, secluded from bad, unskillful qualities, and fulfills a great deal of their own good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, hīnena aggassa patti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The best isn’t reached by the worst. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggena ca kho, bhikkhave, aggassa patti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The best is reached by the best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maṇḍapeyyamidaṃ, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṃ, satthā sammukhībhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This spiritual life is the cream, mendicants, and the Teacher is before you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, vīriyaṃ ārabhatha appattassa pattiyā, anadhigatassa adhigamāya, asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should rouse up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃ no ayaṃ amhākaṃ pabbajjā avañjhā bhavissati saphalā saudrayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In this way our going forth will not be wasted, but will be fruitful and fertile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesañca mayaṃ paribhuñjāma cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhāraṃ tesaṃ te kārā amhesu mahapphalā bhavissanti mahānisaṃsā’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And our use of robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick shall be of great fruit and benefit for those who offered them.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attatthaṃ vā hi, bhikkhave, sampassamānena alameva appamādena sampādetuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Considering your own good, mendicants, is quite enough for you to persist with diligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paratthaṃ vā hi, bhikkhave, sampassamānena alameva appamādena sampādetuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Considering the good of others is quite enough for you to persist with diligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhayatthaṃ vā hi, bhikkhave, sampassamānena alameva appamādena sampādetun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Considering the good of both is quite enough for you to persist with diligence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
