<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.28-28. Bhikkhusutta  - 28. A Mendicant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.28. 28. Bhikkhusutta  - 28. A Mendicant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Dasabalavagga  - 3. The Ten Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tatra kho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu jarāmaraṇaṃ pajānāti, jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ pajānāti, jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ pajānāti, jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti, jātiṃ pajānāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A mendicant understands old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. They understand rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavaṃ pajānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ pajānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhaṃ pajānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ pajānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassaṃ pajānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ pajānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ pajānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ pajānāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre pajānāti, saṅkhārasamudayaṃ pajānāti, saṅkhāranirodhaṃ pajānāti, saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, jarāmaraṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is old age and death? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tesaṃ tesaṃ sattānaṃ tamhi tamhi sattanikāye jarā jīraṇatā khaṇḍiccaṃ pāliccaṃ valittacatā āyuno saṃhāni indriyānaṃ paripāko—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati jarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called old age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tesaṃ tesaṃ sattānaṃ tamhā tamhā sattanikāyā cuti cavanatā bhedo antaradhānaṃ maccu maraṇaṃ kālakiriyā khandhānaṃ bhedo kaḷevarassa nikkhepo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The passing away, perishing, disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, and laying to rest of the corpse of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati maraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called death. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti ayañca jarā idañca maraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is old age, and such is death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, jarāmaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātisamudayā jarāmaraṇasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is the origin of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇanirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When rebirth ceases, old age and death cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminī paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death is simply this noble eightfold path, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, jāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is rebirth? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamo ca, bhikkhave, bhavo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is continued existence? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamañca, bhikkhave, upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is grasping? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamā ca, bhikkhave, taṇhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is craving? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phasso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are choices? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayome, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are three kinds of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyasaṅkhāro, vacīsaṅkhāro, cittasaṅkhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāsamudayā saṅkhārasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is the origin of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjānirodhā saṅkhāranirodho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance ceases, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo saṅkhāranirodhagāminī paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is simply this noble eightfold path, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu evaṃ jarāmaraṇaṃ pajānāti, evaṃ jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ pajānāti, evaṃ jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ pajānāti, evaṃ jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti, evaṃ jātiṃ pajānāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant understands old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. They understand rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārasamudayaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">their origin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">their cessation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the practice that leads to their cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu diṭṭhisampanno itipi, dassanasampanno itipi, āgato imaṃ saddhammaṃ itipi, passati imaṃ saddhammaṃ itipi, sekkhena ñāṇena samannāgato itipi, sekkhāya vijjāya samannāgato itipi, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno itipi, ariyo nibbedhikapañño itipi, amatadvāraṃ āhacca tiṭṭhati itipī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a noble disciple is called ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a trainee’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and ‘one who stands pushing open the door of the deathless’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
