<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.58-58. Nāmarūpasutta  - 58. Name and Form </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.58. 58. Nāmarūpasutta  - 58. Name and Form </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Dukkhavagga  - 6. Suffering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saṃyojaniyesu, bhikkhave, dhammesu assādānupassino viharato nāmarūpassa avakkanti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, name and form are conceived. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahārukkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a great tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa yāni ceva mūlāni adhogamāni, yāni ca tiriyaṅgamāni, sabbāni tāni uddhaṃ ojaṃ abhiharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And its roots going downwards and across all draw the sap upwards. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, mahārukkho tadāhāro tadupādāno ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fueled and sustained by that, the great tree would stand for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, saṃyojaniyesu dhammesu assādānupassino viharato nāmarūpassa avakkanti hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, name and form are conceived. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojaniyesu, bhikkhave, dhammesu ādīnavānupassino viharato nāmarūpassa avakkanti na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, name and form are not conceived. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpanirodhā saḷāyatananirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahārukkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a great tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha puriso āgaccheyya kuddālapiṭakaṃ ādāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a person comes along with a spade and basket. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the great tree is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, saṃyojaniyesu dhammesu ādīnavānupassino viharato nāmarūpassa avakkanti na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, name and form are not conceived. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpanirodhā saḷāyatananirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
