<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.30-30. Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta  - 30. Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.30. 30. Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta  - 30. Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Dasabalavagga  - 3. The Ten Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tatra kho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā jarāmaraṇaṃ nappajānanti, jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ nappajānanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ nappajānanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ nappajānanti te vata jarāmaraṇaṃ samatikkamma ṭhassantīti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t understand old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. It’s impossible that they will abide having transcended old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātiṃ nappajānanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t understand rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre nappajānanti, saṅkhārasamudayaṃ nappajānanti, saṅkhāranirodhaṃ nappajānanti, saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ nappajānanti te vata saṅkhāre samatikkamma ṭhassantīti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t understand choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. It’s impossible that they will abide having transcended choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā jarāmaraṇaṃ pajānanti, jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ pajānanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ pajānanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānanti te vata jarāmaraṇaṃ samatikkamma ṭhassantīti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. It’s possible that they will abide having transcended old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātiṃ pajānanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre pajānanti, saṅkhārasamudayaṃ pajānanti, saṅkhāranirodhaṃ pajānanti, saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te vata saṅkhāre samatikkamma ṭhassantīti ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s possible that they will abide having transcended choices.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasabalavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve dasabalā upanisā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatitthiyabhūmijo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upavāṇo paccayo bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve ca samaṇabrāhmaṇāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
