<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.21-21. Dasabalasutta  - 21. The Ten Powers </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.21. 21. Dasabalasutta  - 21. The Ten Powers </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Dasabalavagga  - 3. The Ten Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasabalasamannāgato, bhikkhave, tathāgato catūhi ca vesārajjehi samannāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a Realized One has ten powers and four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti rūpaṃ iti rūpassa samudayo iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vedanā iti vedanāya samudayo iti vedanāya atthaṅgamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is feeling, such is the origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saññā iti saññāya samudayo iti saññāya atthaṅgamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is perception, such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saṅkhārā iti saṅkhārānaṃ samudayo iti saṅkhārānaṃ atthaṅgamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the ending of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti viññāṇaṃ iti viññāṇassa samudayo iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti, imassuppādā idaṃ uppajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this exists, that is; due to the arising of this, that arises. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imasmiṃ asati idaṃ na hoti, imassa nirodhā idaṃ nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this doesn’t exist, that is not; due to the cessation of this, that ceases. That is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadidaṃ avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is a condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a condition for consciousness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
