<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.42-42. Dutiyapañcaverabhayasutta  - 42. Dangers and Threats (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.42. 42. Dutiyapañcaverabhayasutta  - 42. Dangers and Threats (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Gahapativagga  - 5. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti, catūhi ca sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti, ariyo cassa ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho, so ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble cycle with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi … pe … avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, pāṇātipātī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Killing living creatures … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ, bhikkhave, adinnādāyī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">stealing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ, bhikkhave, kāmesumicchācārī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">sexual misconduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ, bhikkhave, musāvādī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">lying … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ, bhikkhave, surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhāyī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">taking alcoholic drinks that cause negligence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five dangers and threats they have quelled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhamme … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four factors of stream-entry that they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo cassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the noble cycle that they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako paṭiccasamuppādaññeva sādhukaṃ yoniso manasi karoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple carefully and properly attends to dependent origination itself … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the noble cycle that they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa imāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti, imehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti, ayañcassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho, so ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble cycle with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
