<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>13.01-1. Nakhasikhāsutta  - 1. A Fingernail </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">13.01. 1. Nakhasikhāsutta  - 1. A Fingernail </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Abhisamayavagga  - 1. Comprehension </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā parittaṃ nakhasikhāyaṃ paṃsuṃ āropetvā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, picking up a little bit of dirt under his fingernail, addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ, yo vāyaṃ mayā paritto nakhasikhāyaṃ paṃsu āropito, ayaṃ vā mahāpathavī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is more: the little bit of dirt under my fingernail, or this great earth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ, yadidaṃ mahāpathavī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the great earth is far more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamattako bhagavatā paritto nakhasikhāyaṃ paṃsu āropito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The little bit of dirt under your fingernail is tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva satimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na sahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na satasahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti mahāpathaviṃ upanidhāya bhagavatā paritto nakhasikhāyaṃ paṃsu āropito”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the great earth, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa diṭṭhisampannassa puggalassa abhisametāvino etadeva bahutaraṃ dukkhaṃ yadidaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, for a noble disciple accomplished in view, a person with comprehension, the suffering that’s over and done with is more, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamattakaṃ avasiṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what’s left is tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva satimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na sahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na satasahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti purimaṃ dukkhakkhandhaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ upanidhāya yadidaṃ sattakkhattuṃparamatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the mass of suffering in the past that’s over and done with, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part, since there are at most seven more lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mahatthiyo kho, bhikkhave, dhammābhisamayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how very beneficial it is to comprehend the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ mahatthiyo dhammacakkhupaṭilābho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and gain the vision of the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
