<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>13.04-4. Dutiyasambhejjaudakasutta  - 4. Where the Waters Flow Together (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">13.04. 4. Dutiyasambhejjaudakasutta  - 4. Where the Waters Flow Together (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Abhisamayavagga  - 1. Comprehension </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yatthimā mahānadiyo saṃsandanti samenti, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are places where the great rivers—the Ganges, Yamuna, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī—come together and converge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gaṅgā yamunā aciravatī sarabhū mahī, taṃ udakaṃ parikkhayaṃ pariyādānaṃ gaccheyya ṭhapetvā dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose that water dried up and evaporated except for two or three drops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ, yaṃ vā sambhejjaudakaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ yāni vā dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni avasiṭṭhānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is more: the water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated, or the two or three drops left?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ sambhejjaudakaṃ yadidaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated is certainly more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamattakāni dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni avasiṭṭhāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The two or three drops left are tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva satimaṃ kalaṃ upenti na sahassimaṃ kalaṃ upenti na satasahassimaṃ kalaṃ upenti sambhejjaudakaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ upanidhāya dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni avasiṭṭhānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that’s over and done with is more …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammacakkhupaṭilābho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
