<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>13.11-11. Tatiyapabbatasutta  - 11. A Mountain (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">13.11. 11. Tatiyapabbatasutta  - 11. A Mountain (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Abhisamayavagga  - 1. Comprehension </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso sinerussa pabbatarājassa satta muggamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhipeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose a person was to place down on Sineru, the king of mountains, seven pebbles the size of mung beans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ, yā vā satta muggamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā yo vā sineru pabbatarājā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is more: the seven pebbles the size of mung beans, or Sineru, the king of mountains?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ yadidaṃ sineru pabbatarājā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Sineru, the king of mountains, is certainly more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamattikā satta muggamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The seven pebbles the size of mung beans are tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva satimaṃ kalaṃ upenti na sahassimaṃ kalaṃ upenti na satasahassimaṃ kalaṃ upenti sineruṃ pabbatarājānaṃ upanidhāya satta muggamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to Sineru, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa diṭṭhisampannassa puggalassa adhigamaṃ upanidhāya aññatitthiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇaparibbājakānaṃ adhigamo neva satimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na sahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na satasahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, compared with the achievements of a noble disciple accomplished in view, the achievements of the ascetics, brahmins, and wanderers who follow other paths is not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mahādhigamo, bhikkhave, diṭṭhisampanno puggalo, evaṃ mahābhiñño”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So great is the achievement of the person accomplished in view, so great is their direct knowledge.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhisamayasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on comprehension are complete. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nakhasikhā pokkharaṇī, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambhejjaudake ca dve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve pathavī dve samuddā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tayo ca pabbatūpamāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
