<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.27-27. Dasakammapathasutta  - 27. Ten Ways of Performing Deeds </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.27. 27. Dasakammapathasutta  - 27. Ten Ways of Performing Deeds </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Kammapathavagga  - 3. Ways of Performing Deeds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātino pāṇātipātīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who kill living creatures with those who kill living creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adinnādāyino … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who steal … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmesumicchācārino … </span></p>
<p class="p3">commit sexual misconduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādino … </span></p>
<p class="p3">lie … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pisuṇavācā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">speak divisively … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pharusavācā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">speak harshly … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samphappalāpino samphappalāpīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">talk nonsense … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhijjhāluno abhijjhālūhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are covetous … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">byāpannacittā byāpannacittehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are malicious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">have wrong view … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātā paṭiviratā pāṇātipātā paṭiviratehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who refrain from killing living creatures … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adinnādānā paṭiviratā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">who refrain from stealing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmesumicchācārā paṭiviratā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">who refrain from sexual misconduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādā paṭiviratā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">who refrain from lying … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pisuṇāya vācāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">who refrain from divisive speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pharusāya vācāya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">who refrain from harsh speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samphappalāpā paṭiviratā samphappalāpā paṭiviratehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who refrain from talking nonsense … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anabhijjhāluno anabhijjhālūhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are not covetous … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abyāpannacittā abyāpannacittehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are not malicious … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">have right view with those who have right view.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
