<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.13-13. Giñjakāvasathasutta  - 13. In the Brick Hall </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.13. 13. Giñjakāvasathasutta  - 13. In the Brick Hall </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā ñātike viharati giñjakāvasathe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Nādika in the brick house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātuṃ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati saññā, uppajjati diṭṭhi, uppajjati vitakko”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, an element gives rise to a perception, a view, and a thought.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā kaccāno bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Kaccāna said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāyaṃ, bhante, diṭṭhi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, regarding </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asammāsambuddhesu sammāsambuddhā’ti, ayaṃ nu kho, bhante, diṭṭhi kiṃ paṭicca paññāyatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who are not fully awakened Buddhas, there is a view that they are in fact fully awakened Buddhas. Due to what does this view appear?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mahati kho esā, kaccāna, dhātu yadidaṃ avijjādhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s a mighty thing, Kaccāna, the element of ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hīnaṃ, kaccāna, dhātuṃ paṭicca uppajjati hīnā saññā, hīnā diṭṭhi, hīno vitakko, hīnā cetanā, hīnā patthanā, hīno paṇidhi, hīno puggalo, hīnā vācā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An inferior element gives rise to inferior perceptions, inferior views, inferior thoughts, inferior intentions, inferior aims, inferior wishes, an inferior person, and inferior speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hīnaṃ ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals the inferior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hīnā tassa upapattīti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that their rebirth is inferior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majjhimaṃ, kaccāna, dhātuṃ paṭicca uppajjati majjhimā saññā, majjhimā diṭṭhi, majjhimo vitakko, majjhimā cetanā, majjhimā patthanā, majjhimo paṇidhi, majjhimo puggalo, majjhimā vācā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A middling element gives rise to middling perceptions, middling views, middling thoughts, middling intentions, middling aims, middling wishes, a middling person, and middling speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhimaṃ ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals the middling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhimā tassa upapattīti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that their rebirth is middling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṇītaṃ, kaccāna, dhātuṃ paṭicca uppajjati paṇītā saññā, paṇītā diṭṭhi, paṇīto vitakko, paṇītā cetanā, paṇītā patthanā, paṇīto paṇidhi, paṇīto puggalo, paṇītā vācā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A superior element gives rise to superior perceptions, superior views, superior thoughts, superior intentions, superior aims, superior wishes, a superior person, and superior speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇītaṃ ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals the superior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇītā tassa upapattīti vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that their rebirth is superior.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
