<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.10-10. Dutiyabāhiraphassanānattasutta  - 10. No Diversity of Gains </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.10. 10. Dutiyabāhiraphassanānattasutta  - 10. No Diversity of Gains </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nānattavagga  - 1. Diversity </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātunānattaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṃ, phassa … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of thoughts. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chanda … </span></p>
<p class="p3">desires … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariḷāha … </span></p>
<p class="p3">passions … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesanānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati lābhanānattaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Diversity of searches gives rise to diversity of gains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no lābhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariyesanānānattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Diversity of gains doesn’t give rise to diversity of searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no pariyesanānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṃ, no pariḷāhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Diversity of searches doesn’t give rise to diversity of passions. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chanda … </span></p>
<p class="p3">desires … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassa … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contacts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkappa … </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññānānattaṃ, no saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the diversity of elements? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātu … pe … dhammadhātu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sight element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the touch element, and the thought element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the diversity of elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of perceptions … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassa … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contacts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chanda … </span></p>
<p class="p3">desires … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariḷāha … </span></p>
<p class="p3">passions … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">searches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lābha … </span></p>
<p class="p3">gains … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no lābhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariyesanānānattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">while diversity of gains doesn’t give rise to diversity of searches … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no pariyesanānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāha … </span></p>
<p class="p3">passions … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chanda … </span></p>
<p class="p3">desires … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassa … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contacts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no saṅkappanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, no saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">thoughts … perceptions … elements? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātuṃ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati rūpasaññā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammadhātuṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaññā, dhammasaññaṃ paṭicca uppajjati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The thought element gives rise to the perception of thoughts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammapariyesanā, dhammapariyesanaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammalābho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The search for thoughts gives rise to gaining thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no dhammalābhaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammapariyesanā, no dhammapariyesanaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammapariḷāho, no dhammapariḷāhaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammacchando, no dhammacchandaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasamphassajā vedanā, no dhammasamphassajaṃ vedanaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasamphasso, no dhammasamphassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaṅkappo, no dhammasaṅkappaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaññā, no dhammasaññaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammadhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gaining of thoughts doesn’t give rise to the search for thoughts. The search for thoughts doesn’t give rise to the passion for thoughts. The passion for thoughts doesn’t give rise to the desire for thoughts. The desire for thoughts doesn’t give rise to thoughts about thoughts. Thoughts about thoughts don’t give rise to perceptions of thoughts. Perceptions of thoughts don’t give rise to the thought element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkappa … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassa … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chanda … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariḷāha … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lābha … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no lābhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariyesanānānattaṃ, no pariyesanānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṃ, no pariḷāhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandanānattaṃ, no chandanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattaṃ, no vedanānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṃ, no phassanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṃ, no saṅkappanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, no saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānattavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhātuphassañca no cetaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā apare duve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ ajjhattapañcakaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhātusaññañca no cetaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phassassa apare duve, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etaṃ bāhirapañcakanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
