<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.17-17. Assaddhasaṃsandanasutta  - 17. Faithless </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.17. 17. Assaddhasaṃsandanasutta  - 17. Faithless </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddhā assaddhehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the faithless with the faithless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahirikā ahirikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the shameless with the shameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anottappino anottappīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the imprudent with the imprudent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appassutā appassutehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the uneducated with the uneducated, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kusītā kusītehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the lazy with the lazy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muṭṭhassatino muṭṭhassatīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the unmindful with the unmindful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duppaññā duppaññehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the witless with the witless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atītampi kho, bhikkhave, addhānaṃ dhātusova sattā saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past, too, sentient beings came together and converged because of an element. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddhā assaddhehi saddhiṃ saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahirikā ahirikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anottappino anottappīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appassutā appassutehi saddhiṃ saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kusītā kusītehi saddhiṃ saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muṭṭhassatino muṭṭhassatīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duppaññā duppaññehi saddhiṃ saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgatampi kho, bhikkhave, addhānaṃ dhātusova sattā saṃsandissanti samessanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the future, too, sentient beings will come together and converge because of an element. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddhā assaddhehi saddhiṃ saṃsandissanti samessanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahirikā ahirikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandissanti samessanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anottappino anottappīhi saddhiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appassutā appassutehi saddhiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kusītā kusītehi saddhiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muṭṭhassatino muṭṭhassatīhi saddhiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duppaññā duppaññehi saddhiṃ saṃsandissanti samessanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahipi kho, bhikkhave, paccuppannaṃ addhānaṃ dhātusova sattā saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddhā assaddhehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahirikā ahirikehi saddhiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anottappino anottappīhi saddhiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appassutā appassutehi saddhiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kusītā kusītehi saddhiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muṭṭhassatino muṭṭhassatīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duppaññā duppaññehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings come together and converge because of an element: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhā saddhehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the faithful with the faithful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hirimanā hirimanehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the conscientious with the conscientious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappino ottappīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the prudent with the prudent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussutā bahussutehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the learned with the learned, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraddhavīriyā āraddhavīriyehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the energetic with the energetic, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upaṭṭhitassatino upaṭṭhitassatīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mindful with the mindful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavanto paññavantehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the wise with the wise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atītampi kho, bhikkhave, addhānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgatampi kho, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the future … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etarahipi kho, bhikkhave, paccuppannaṃ addhānaṃ dhātusova sattā saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhā saddhehi saddhiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavanto paññavantehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
