<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>15.07-7. Sāvakasutta  - 7. Disciples </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">15.07. 7. Sāvakasutta  - 7. Disciples </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha … and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kīvabahukā nu kho, bhante, kappā abbhatītā atikkantā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how many eons have passed?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bahukā kho, bhikkhave, kappā abbhatītā atikkantā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, many eons have passed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te na sukarā saṅkhātuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy to calculate </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakā kappā iti vā, ettakāni kappasatāni iti vā, ettakāni kappasahassāni iti vā, ettakāni kappasatasahassāni iti vā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how many eons have passed, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of eons.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkā pana, bhante, upamaṃ kātun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, is it possible to give a simile?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkā, bhikkhave”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s possible,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhassu, bhikkhave, cattāro sāvakā vassasatāyukā vassasatajīvino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suppose there were four disciples with a lifespan of a hundred years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te divase divase kappasatasahassaṃ kappasatasahassaṃ anussareyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And each day they would each recollect a hundred thousand eons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ananussaritāva, bhikkhave, tehi kappā assu, atha kho te cattāro sāvakā vassasatāyukā vassasatajīvino vassasatassa accayena kālaṃ kareyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those four disciples would pass away after a hundred years and there would still be eons that they haven’t recollected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ bahukā kho, bhikkhave, kappā abbhatītā atikkantā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how many eons have passed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te na sukarā saṅkhātuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy to calculate </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakā kappā iti vā, ettakāni kappasatāni iti vā, ettakāni kappasahassāni iti vā, ettakāni kappasatasahassāni iti vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how many eons have passed, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of eons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Transmigration has no known beginning. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">alaṃ vimuccitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
