<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>15.11-11. Duggatasutta  - 11. In a Sorry State </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">15.11. 11. Duggatasutta  - 11. In a Sorry State </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, transmigration has no known beginning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbā koṭi na paññāyati avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, bhikkhave, passeyyātha duggataṃ durūpetaṃ niṭṭhamettha gantabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you see someone in a sorry state, in distress, you should conclude: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘amhehipi evarūpaṃ paccanubhūtaṃ iminā dīghena addhunā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In all this long time, we too have undergone the same thing.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? Transmigration has no known beginning. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvañcidaṃ, bhikkhave, alameva sabbasaṅkhāresu nibbindituṃ alaṃ virajjituṃ alaṃ vimuccitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
