<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>15.04-4. Khīrasutta  - 4. Mother’s Milk </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">15.04. 4. Khīrasutta  - 4. Mother’s Milk </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, transmigration has no known beginning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbā koṭi na paññāyati avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ, yaṃ vā vo iminā dīghena addhunā sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ mātuthaññaṃ pītaṃ, yaṃ vā catūsu mahāsamuddesu udakan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think? Which is more: the mother’s milk you’ve drunk while roaming and transmigrating for such a very long time, or the water in the four oceans?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kho mayaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāma, etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ yaṃ no iminā dīghena addhunā sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ mātuthaññaṃ pītaṃ, na tveva catūsu mahāsamuddesu udakan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“As we understand the Buddha’s teaching, the mother’s milk we’ve drunk while roaming and transmigrating is more than the water in the four oceans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhave, sādhu kho me tumhe, bhikkhave, evaṃ dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, mendicants! It’s good that you understand my teaching like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadeva, bhikkhave, bahutaraṃ yaṃ vo iminā dīghena addhunā sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ mātuthaññaṃ pītaṃ, na tveva catūsu mahāsamuddesu udakaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mother’s milk you’ve drunk while roaming and transmigrating for such a very long time is more than the water in the four oceans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Transmigration has no known beginning. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">alaṃ vimuccitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
