<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>16.03-3. Candūpamāsutta  - 3. Like the Moon </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">16.03. 3. Candūpamāsutta  - 3. Like the Moon </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Kassapavagga  - 1. Kassapa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Candūpamā, bhikkhave, kulāni upasaṅkamatha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should approach families like the moon: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apakasseva kāyaṃ, apakassa cittaṃ, niccanavakā kulesu appagabbhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">withdrawn in body and mind, always the newcomer, and never impudent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso jarudapānaṃ vā olokeyya pabbatavisamaṃ vā nadīviduggaṃ vā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a person were to look down at an old well, a rugged cliff, or an inaccessible riverland. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apakasseva kāyaṃ, apakassa cittaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d withdraw their body and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, candūpamā kulāni upasaṅkamatha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, you should approach families like the moon: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apakasseva kāyaṃ, apakassa cittaṃ, niccanavakā kulesu appagabbhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">withdrawn in body and mind, always the newcomer, and never impudent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassapo, bhikkhave, candūpamo kulāni upasaṅkamati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Kassapa approaches families like the moon: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apakasseva kāyaṃ, apakassa cittaṃ, niccanavako kulesu appagabbho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">withdrawn in body and mind, always the newcomer, and never impudent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃrūpo bhikkhu arahati kulāni upasaṅkamitun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What kind of mendicant is worthy of approaching families?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṃnettikā bhagavaṃpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu vata, bhante, bhagavantaṃyeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā ākāse pāṇiṃ cālesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha waved his hand in space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṃ ākāse pāṇi na sajjati na gayhati na bajjhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this hand is not stuck or held or caught in space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, yassa kassaci bhikkhuno kulāni upasaṅkamato kulesu cittaṃ na sajjati na gayhati na bajjhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when approaching families, a mendicant’s mind is not stuck or held or caught, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘labhantu lābhakāmā, puññakāmā karontu puññānī’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May those who want material possessions get them, and may those who want merit make merits!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathāsakena lābhena attamano hoti sumano, evaṃ paresaṃ lābhena attamano hoti sumano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re just as pleased and happy when others get something as they are when they get something. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evarūpo kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu arahati kulāni upasaṅkamituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This kind of mendicant is worthy of approaching families. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassapassa, bhikkhave, kulāni upasaṅkamato kulesu cittaṃ na sajjati na gayhati na bajjhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When Kassapa approaches families, his mind is not stuck or held or caught, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘labhantu lābhakāmā, puññakāmā karontu puññānī’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May those who want material possessions get them, and may those who want merit make merits!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathāsakena lābhena attamano hoti sumano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s just as pleased and happy when others get something as he is when he gets something. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ paresaṃ lābhena attamano hoti sumano. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃrūpassa bhikkhuno aparisuddhā dhammadesanā hoti, kathaṃrūpassa bhikkhuno parisuddhā dhammadesanā hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What kind of mendicant’s teaching is pure, and what kind is impure?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṃnettikā bhagavaṃpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu vata, bhante, bhagavantaṃyeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhikkhave, suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, mendicants, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu evaṃcitto paresaṃ dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whoever teaches Dhamma to others with the thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vata me dhammaṃ suṇeyyuṃ, sutvā ca pana dhammaṃ pasīdeyyuṃ, pasannā ca me pasannākāraṃ kareyyun’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Oh! May they listen to the teaching from me. When they’ve heard it, may they gain confidence in the teaching and demonstrate their confidence to me.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evarūpassa kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno aparisuddhā dhammadesanā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a mendicant’s teaching is impure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu evaṃcitto paresaṃ dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever teaches Dhamma to others with the thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aho vata me dhammaṃ suṇeyyuṃ, sutvā ca pana dhammaṃ ājāneyyuṃ, ājānitvā ca pana tathattāya paṭipajjeyyun’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Oh! May they listen to the teaching from me. When they’ve heard it, may they understand the teaching and practice accordingly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti dhammasudhammataṃ paṭicca paresaṃ dhammaṃ deseti, kāruññaṃ paṭicca anuddayaṃ paṭicca anukampaṃ upādāya paresaṃ dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they teach others because of the natural excellence of the teaching, out of compassion, kindness, and sympathy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpassa kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno parisuddhā dhammadesanā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a mendicant’s teaching is pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassapo, bhikkhave, evaṃcitto paresaṃ dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Kassapa teaches Dhamma to others with the thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aho vata me dhammaṃ suṇeyyuṃ, sutvā ca pana dhammaṃ ājāneyyuṃ, ājānitvā ca pana tathattāya paṭipajjeyyun’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Oh! May they listen to the teaching from me. When they’ve heard it, may they understand the teaching and practice accordingly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti dhammasudhammataṃ paṭicca paresaṃ dhammaṃ deseti, kāruññaṃ paṭicca anuddayaṃ paṭicca anukampaṃ upādāya paresaṃ dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thus he teaches others because of the natural excellence of the teaching, out of compassion, kindness, and sympathy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassapena vā hi vo, bhikkhave, ovadissāmi yo vā panassa kassapasadiso, ovaditehi ca pana vo tathattāya paṭipajjitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will exhort you with the example of Kassapa or someone like him. You should practice accordingly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
