<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>16.12-12. Paraṃmaraṇasutta  - 12. The Realized One After Death </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">16.12. 12. Paraṃmaraṇasutta  - 12. The Realized One After Death </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Kassapavagga  - 1. Kassapa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ca mahākassapo āyasmā ca sāriputto bārāṇasiyaṃ viharanti isipatane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Mahākassapa and Venerable Sāriputta were staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā mahākassapo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā mahākassapena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Venerable Mahākassapa, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṃ mahākassapaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Mahākassapa: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu kho, āvuso kassapa, hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Kassapa, does a Realized One exist after death?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abyākataṃ kho etaṃ, āvuso, bhagavatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, this has not been declared by the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ panāvuso, na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, does a Realized One not exist after death?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evampi kho, āvuso, abyākataṃ bhagavatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This too has not been declared by the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho, āvuso, hoti ca na ca hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, does a Realized One both exist and not exist after death?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abyākataṃ kho etaṃ, āvuso, bhagavatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This too has not been declared by the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘hoti ca na ca hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ panāvuso, neva hoti, na na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, does a Realized One neither exist nor not exist after death?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evampi kho, āvuso, abyākataṃ bhagavatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This too has not been declared by the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘neva hoti na na hoti tathāgato paraṃ maraṇā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kasmā cetaṃ, āvuso, abyākataṃ bhagavatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And why has this not been declared by the Buddha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na hetaṃ, āvuso, atthasaṃhitaṃ nādibrahmacariyakaṃ na nibbidāya na virāgāya na nirodhāya na upasamāya na abhiññāya na sambodhāya na nibbānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because it’s not beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It doesn’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā taṃ abyākataṃ bhagavatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it has not been declared by the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atha kiñcarahāvuso, byākataṃ bhagavatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So what now has been declared by the Buddha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idaṃ ‘dukkhan’ti kho, āvuso, byākataṃ bhagavatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘This is suffering’ has been declared by the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ ‘dukkhasamudayo’ti byākataṃ bhagavatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the origin of suffering’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ ‘dukkhanirodho’ti byākataṃ bhagavatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ ‘dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti byākataṃ bhagavatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’ has been declared by the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kasmā cetaṃ, āvuso, byākataṃ bhagavatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And why has this been declared by the Buddha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etañhi, āvuso, atthasaṃhitaṃ etaṃ ādibrahmacariyakaṃ etaṃ nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because it’s beneficial and relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It leads to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā taṃ byākataṃ bhagavatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why it has been declared by the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
