<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>17.30-30. Bhikkhusutta  - 30. A Mendicant With Defilements Ended </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">17.30. 30. Bhikkhusutta  - 30. A Mendicant With Defilements Ended </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyavagga  - 3. The Third Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yopi so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu arahaṃ khīṇāsavo tassapāhaṃ lābhasakkārasiloko antarāyāya vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, possessions, honor, and popularity are an obstacle even for a mendicant who is perfected, with defilements ended.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa pana, bhante, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno lābhasakkārasiloko antarāyāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what do possessions, honor, and popularity obstruct for a mendicant with defilements ended?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā hissa sā, ānanda, akuppā cetovimutti nāhaṃ tassā lābhasakkārasilokaṃ antarāyāya vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, I don’t say that possessions, honor, and popularity obstruct the unshakable freedom of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca khvassa, ānanda, appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārā adhigatā tesāhamassa lābhasakkārasilokaṃ antarāyāya vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I do say that possessions, honor, and popularity obstruct the achievement of blissful meditations in this very life for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dāruṇo kho, ānanda, lābhasakkārasiloko kaṭuko pharuso antarāyiko anuttarassa yogakkhemassa adhigamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity—bitter and harsh, an obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātihānanda, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘uppannaṃ lābhasakkārasilokaṃ pajahissāma, na ca no uppanno lābhasakkārasiloko cittaṃ pariyādāya ṭhassatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will give up arisen possessions, honor, and popularity, and we won’t let them occupy our minds.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, ānanda, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyo vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmo ca kalyāṇī, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">putto ca ekadhītu ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇabrāhmaṇā tīṇi, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chavi rajju ca bhikkhunāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
