<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>17.10-10. Sagāthakasutta  - 10. With Verses </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">17.10. 10. Sagāthakasutta  - 10. With Verses </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dāruṇo, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … adhigamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Possessions, honor, and popularity are brutal … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ passāmi sakkārena abhibhūtaṃ pariyādiṇṇacittaṃ, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a case where I see a certain person whose mind is overcome and overwhelmed by honor. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ passāmi asakkārena abhibhūtaṃ pariyādiṇṇacittaṃ, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take another case where I see a certain person whose mind is overcome and overwhelmed by lack of honor. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ passāmi sakkārena ca asakkārena ca tadubhayena abhibhūtaṃ pariyādiṇṇacittaṃ, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And take another case where I see a certain person whose mind is overcome and overwhelmed by both honor and lack of honor. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassa sakkariyamānassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whether they’re honored </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asakkārena cūbhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or not honored, or both, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhi na vikampati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">their immersion doesn’t waver </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamāṇavihārino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as they live diligently. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ jhāyinaṃ sātatikaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They persistently practice absorption </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhumaṃ diṭṭhivipassakaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with subtle view and discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upādānakkhayārāmaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rejoicing in the ending of grasping, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āhu sappuriso itī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re said to be a good person.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamo vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dāruṇo baḷisaṃ kummaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dīghalomi ca mīḷhakaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asani diddhaṃ siṅgālaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">verambhena sagāthakanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
