<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>17.24-24. Ekadhītusutta  - 24. An Only Daughter </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">17.24. 24. Ekadhītusutta  - 24. An Only Daughter </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyavagga  - 3. The Third Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dāruṇo, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Possessions, honor, and popularity are brutal … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhā bhikkhave upāsikā ekaṃ dhītaraṃ piyaṃ manāpaṃ evaṃ sammā āyācamānā āyāceyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A faithful laywoman with a dear and beloved only daughter would rightly appeal to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tādisā, ayye, bhavāhi yādisā khujjuttarā ca upāsikā veḷukaṇḍakiyā ca nandamātā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My darling, please be like the laywomen Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda’s mother.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā, bhikkhave, tulā etaṃ pamāṇaṃ mama sāvikānaṃ upāsikānaṃ, yadidaṃ khujjuttarā ca upāsikā veḷukaṇḍakiyā ca nandamātā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are a standard and a measure for my female lay disciples, that is, the laywomen Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda’s mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho tvaṃ, ayye, agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘But my darling, if you go forth from the lay life to homelessness, please be like the nuns Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tādisā, ayye, bhavāhi yādisā khemā ca bhikkhunī uppalavaṇṇā cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā, bhikkhave, tulā etaṃ pamāṇaṃ mama sāvikānaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ, yadidaṃ khemā ca bhikkhunī uppalavaṇṇā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are a standard and a measure for my nun disciples, that is, the nuns Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā ca kho tvaṃ, ayye, sekhaṃ appattamānasaṃ lābhasakkārasiloko anupāpuṇātūti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘And my darling, may you not come into possessions, honor, and popularity while you’re still a trainee and haven’t achieved your heart’s desire.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniṃ sekhaṃ appattamānasaṃ lābhasakkārasiloko anupāpuṇāti, so tassā hoti antarāyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a trainee who hasn’t achieved their heart’s desire comes into possessions, honor, and popularity it’s an obstacle for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
