<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>17.35-35. Acirapakkantasutta  - 35. Shortly After He Left </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">17.35. 35. Acirapakkantasutta  - 35. Shortly After He Left </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Catutthavagga  - 4. The Fourth Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate acirapakkante devadatte. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain, not long after Devadatta had left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā devadattaṃ ārabbha bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha spoke to the mendicants about Devadatta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“attavadhāya, bhikkhave, devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi, parābhavāya devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Possessions, honor, and popularity came to Devadatta for his own ruin and downfall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kadalī attavadhāya phalaṃ deti, parābhavāya phalaṃ deti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a banana tree … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, attavadhāya devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi, parābhavāya devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, veḷu attavadhāya phalaṃ deti, parābhavāya phalaṃ deti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or a bamboo … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, attavadhāya devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi, parābhavāya devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, naḷo attavadhāya phalaṃ deti, parābhavāya phalaṃ deti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or a reed, all of which bear fruit to their own ruin and downfall … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, attavadhāya devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi, parābhavāya devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, assatarī attavadhāya gabbhaṃ gaṇhāti, parābhavāya gabbhaṃ gaṇhāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a mule, which becomes pregnant to its own ruin and downfall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhave, attavadhāya devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi, parābhavāya devadattassa lābhasakkārasiloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, possessions, honor, and popularity came to Devadatta for his own ruin and downfall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Phalaṃ ve kadaliṃ hanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The banana tree is destroyed by its own fruit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phalaṃ veḷuṃ phalaṃ naḷaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as are the bamboo and the reed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkāro kāpurisaṃ hanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Honor destroys a sinner, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gabbho assatariṃ yathā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as pregnancy destroys a mule.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
