<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>17.38-43-38–43. Pitusuttādichakka  - 38–43. Father, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">17.38-43. 38–43. Pitusuttādichakka  - 38–43. Father, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Catutthavagga  - 4. The Fourth Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dāruṇo, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko kaṭuko pharuso antarāyiko anuttarassa yogakkhemassa adhigamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Possessions, honor, and popularity are brutal, bitter, and harsh. They’re an obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain person, I understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na cāyamāyasmā pitupi hetu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This venerable would not tell a deliberate lie even for the sake of their father. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(vitthāretabbaṃ) … </span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in SN 17.37.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhātupi hetu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">brother … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhaginiyāpi hetu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">sister … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puttassapi hetu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">son … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhītuyāpi hetu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">daughter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pajāpatiyāpi hetu sampajānamusā bhāseyyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wife.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena lābhasakkārasilokena abhibhūtaṃ pariyādiṇṇacittaṃ sampajānamusā bhāsantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But some time later I see them tell a deliberate lie because their mind is overcome and overwhelmed by possessions, honor, and popularity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko kaṭuko pharuso antarāyiko anuttarassa yogakkhemassa adhigamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity—bitter and harsh, an obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘uppannaṃ lābhasakkārasilokaṃ pajahissāma, na ca no uppanno lābhasakkārasiloko cittaṃ pariyādāya ṭhassatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will give up arisen possessions, honor, and popularity, and we won’t let them occupy our minds.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Terasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catuttho vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhindi mūlaṃ duve dhammā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pakkantaṃ ratha mātari; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pitā bhātā ca bhaginī, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">putto dhītā pajāpatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhasakkārasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on possessions, honor, and popularity are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
