<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>17.03-3. Kummasutta  - 3. A Turtle </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">17.03. 3. Kummasutta  - 3. A Turtle </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dāruṇo, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … adhigamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Possessions, honor, and popularity are brutal … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, aññatarasmiṃ udakarahade mahākummakulaṃ ciranivāsi ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once upon a time in a certain lake there was a large family of turtles that had lived there for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, aññataro kummo aññataraṃ kummaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then one of the turtles said to another, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā kho tvaṃ, tāta kumma, etaṃ padesaṃ agamāsī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My dear turtle, don’t you go to that place.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agamāsi kho, bhikkhave, so kummo taṃ padesaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that turtle did go to that place, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ luddo papatāya vijjhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a hunter pierced her with a harpoon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, so kummo yena so kummo tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that turtle went back to the other turtle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho, bhikkhave, so kummo taṃ kummaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the other turtle saw her coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna taṃ kummaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">he said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kacci tvaṃ, tāta kumma, na taṃ padesaṃ agamāsī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My dear turtle, I hope you didn’t go to that place!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Agamāsiṃ khvāhaṃ, tāta kumma, taṃ padesan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I did.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kacci panāsi, tāta kumma, akkhato anupahato’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘But my dear turtle, I hope you’re not hurt or injured!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Akkhato khomhi, tāta kumma, anupahato, atthi ca me idaṃ suttakaṃ piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandhan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’m not hurt or injured. But this cord keeps dragging behind me.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tagghasi, tāta kumma, khato, taggha upahato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Indeed, my dear turtle, you’re hurt and injured! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etena hi te, tāta kumma, suttakena pitaro ca pitāmahā ca anayaṃ āpannā byasanaṃ āpannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your father and grandfather met with tragedy and disaster because of such a cord. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaccha dāni tvaṃ, tāta kumma, na dāni tvaṃ amhākan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Go now, you are no longer one of us.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Luddoti kho, bhikkhave, mārassetaṃ pāpimato adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Hunter’ is a term for Māra the Wicked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Papatāti kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasilokassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Harpoon’ is a term for possessions, honor, and popularity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suttakanti kho, bhikkhave, nandīrāgassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Cord’ is a term for desire with relishing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu uppannaṃ lābhasakkārasilokaṃ assādeti nikāmeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever enjoys and likes arisen possessions, honor, and popularity is called a mendicant who has been pierced with a harpoon. They’ve met with tragedy and disaster, and the Wicked One can treat them however he wants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu giddho papatāya anayaṃ āpanno byasanaṃ āpanno yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
