<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>20.09-9. Nāgasutta  - 9. A Bull Elephant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">20.09. 9. Nāgasutta  - 9. A Bull Elephant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Opammavagga  - 1. Similes </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro navo bhikkhu ativelaṃ kulāni upasaṅkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a certain junior mendicant went to visit families too often. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ bhikkhū evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mendicants said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyasmā ativelaṃ kulāni upasaṅkamī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, don’t go to visit families too often.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu bhikkhūhi vuccamāno evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that mendicant, when spoken to by the mendicants, said this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ime hi nāma therā bhikkhū kulāni upasaṅkamitabbaṃ maññissanti, kimaṅgaṃ panāhan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But these senior mendicants think they can go to visit families, so why can’t I?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha, bhante, aññataro navo bhikkhu ativelaṃ kulāni upasaṅkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ bhikkhū evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘māyasmā ativelaṃ kulāni upasaṅkamī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu bhikkhūhi vuccamāno evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ime hi nāma therā bhikkhū kulāni upasaṅkamitabbaṃ maññissanti, kimaṅgaṃ panāhan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, araññāyatane mahāsarasī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a great lake in the jungle, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ nāgā upanissāya viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with bull elephants living nearby. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ sarasiṃ ogāhetvā soṇḍāya bhisamuḷālaṃ abbuhetvā suvikkhālitaṃ vikkhāletvā akaddamaṃ saṅkhāditvā ajjhoharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d plunge into the lake and pull up lotus bulbs with their trunks. They’d wash them thoroughly until they were free of mud before chewing and swallowing them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ taṃ vaṇṇāya ceva hoti balāya ca, na ca tatonidānaṃ maraṇaṃ vā nigacchanti maraṇamattaṃ vā dukkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That was good for their appearance and health, and wouldn’t result in death or deadly pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃyeva kho pana, bhikkhave, mahānāgānaṃ anusikkhamānā taruṇā bhiṅkacchāpā taṃ sarasiṃ ogāhetvā soṇḍāya bhisamuḷālaṃ abbuhetvā na suvikkhālitaṃ vikkhāletvā sakaddamaṃ asaṅkhāditvā ajjhoharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The young cubs, following the example of the great bull elephants, plunged into the lake and pulled up lotus bulbs with their trunks. But they didn’t wash them thoroughly, and while they were still muddy they chewed and swallowed them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ taṃ neva vaṇṇāya hoti na balāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That was not good for their appearance and health, and resulted in death or deadly pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatonidānaṃ maraṇaṃ vā nigacchanti maraṇamattaṃ vā dukkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idha therā bhikkhū pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā piṇḍāya pavisanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are senior mendicants who robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tattha dhammaṃ bhāsanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There they speak on the teachings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ gihī pasannākāraṃ karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and lay people demonstrate their confidence in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ lābhaṃ agadhitā amucchitā anajjhopannā ādīnavadassāvino nissaraṇapaññā paribhuñjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when they get things, they use them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ taṃ vaṇṇāya ceva hoti balāya ca, na ca tatonidānaṃ maraṇaṃ vā nigacchanti maraṇamattaṃ vā dukkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s good for their appearance and health, and doesn’t result in death or deadly pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃyeva kho pana, bhikkhave, therānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ anusikkhamānā navā bhikkhū pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā piṇḍāya pavisanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Junior mendicants, following the example of the senior mendicants, robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tattha dhammaṃ bhāsanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There they speak on the teachings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ gihī pasannākāraṃ karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and lay people demonstrate their confidence in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ lābhaṃ gadhitā mucchitā ajjhopannā anādīnavadassāvino anissaraṇapaññā paribhuñjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they get things, they use them tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, not understanding the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ taṃ neva vaṇṇāya hoti na balāya, te tatonidānaṃ maraṇaṃ vā nigacchanti maraṇamattaṃ vā dukkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s not good for their appearance and health, and results in death or deadly pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘agadhitā amucchitā anajjhopannā ādīnavadassāvino nissaraṇapaññā taṃ lābhaṃ paribhuñjissāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When we get things, we will use them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
