<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>20.05-5. Sattisutta  - 5. A Spear </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">20.05. 5. Sattisutta  - 5. A Spear </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Opammavagga  - 1. Similes </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, satti tiṇhaphalā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose there was a sharp-pointed spear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha puriso āgaccheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a man came along and thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ imaṃ sattiṃ tiṇhaphalaṃ pāṇinā vā muṭṭhinā vā paṭileṇissāmi paṭikoṭṭissāmi paṭivaṭṭessāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘With my hand or fist I’ll fold this sharp spear over, bend it back, and twist it around!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhabbo nu kho so puriso amuṃ sattiṃ tiṇhaphalaṃ pāṇinā vā muṭṭhinā vā paṭileṇetuṃ paṭikoṭṭetuṃ paṭivaṭṭetun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is that man capable of doing so?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kissa hetu”? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why not? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Asu hi, bhante, satti tiṇhaphalā na sukarā pāṇinā vā muṭṭhinā vā paṭileṇetuṃ paṭikoṭṭetuṃ paṭivaṭṭetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because it’s not easy to fold that sharp spear over, bend it back, and twist it around with the hand or fist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvadeva ca pana so puriso kilamathassa vighātassa bhāgī assā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That man will eventually get weary and frustrated.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yassa kassaci bhikkhuno mettācetovimutti bhāvitā bahulīkatā yānīkatā vatthukatā anuṭṭhitā paricitā susamāraddhā, tassa ce amanusso cittaṃ khipitabbaṃ maññeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, suppose a mendicant has developed the heart’s release by love, has cultivated it, made it a vehicle and a basis, kept it up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Should any non-human think to overthrow their mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho sveva amanusso kilamathassa vighātassa bhāgī assa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll eventually get weary and frustrated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mettā no cetovimutti bhāvitā bhavissati bahulīkatā yānīkatā vatthukatā anuṭṭhitā paricitā susamāraddhā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will develop the heart’s release by love. We’ll cultivate it, make it our vehicle and our basis, keep it up, consolidate it, and properly implement it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
