<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>20.11-11. Siṅgālasutta  - 11. A Jackal </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">20.11. 11. Siṅgālasutta  - 11. A Jackal </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Opammavagga  - 1. Similes </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Assuttha no tumhe, bhikkhave, rattiyā paccūsasamayaṃ jarasiṅgālassa vassamānassā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, did you hear an old jackal howling at the crack of dawn?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eso kho, bhikkhave, jarasiṅgālo ukkaṇḍakena nāma rogajātena phuṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That old jackal has the disease called mange. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yena yena icchati tena tena gacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet it still goes where it wants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha yattha icchati tattha tattha tiṭṭhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">stands where it wants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha yattha icchati tattha tattha nisīdati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">sits where it wants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha yattha icchati tattha tattha nipajjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and lies down where it wants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sītakopi naṃ vāto upavāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the cool breeze still blows on it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu khvassa, bhikkhave, yaṃ idhekacco sakyaputtiyapaṭiñño evarūpampi attabhāvapaṭilābhaṃ paṭisaṃvediyetha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A certain person here who claims to be a follower of the Sakyan son would be lucky to experience even such an incarnation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘appamattā viharissāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will stay diligent.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
