<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>20.08-8. Kaliṅgarasutta  - 8. Wood Blocks </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">20.08. 8. Kaliṅgarasutta  - 8. Wood Blocks </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Opammavagga  - 1. Similes </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kaliṅgarūpadhānā, bhikkhave, etarahi licchavī viharanti appamattā ātāpino upāsanasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these days the Licchavis live using wood blocks as pillows, and they exercise diligently and keenly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ rājā māgadho ajātasattu vedehiputto na labhati otāraṃ na labhati ārammaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha finds no vulnerability, he’s got no foothold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavissanti, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ licchavī sukhumālā mudutalunahatthapādā </span></p>
<p class="p3">But in the future the Licchavis will become delicate, with soft and tender hands and feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te mudukāsu seyyāsu tūlabibbohanāsu yāvasūriyuggamanā seyyaṃ kappissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ll sleep on soft beds with down pillows until the sun comes up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ rājā māgadho ajātasattu vedehiputto lacchati otāraṃ lacchati ārammaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha will find a vulnerability, he’ll get his foothold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaliṅgarūpadhānā, bhikkhave, etarahi bhikkhū viharanti appamattā ātāpino padhānasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These days the mendicants live using wood blocks as pillows, and they meditate diligently and keenly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ māro pāpimā na labhati otāraṃ na labhati ārammaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Māra the Wicked finds no vulnerability, he's got no foothold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavissanti, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ bhikkhū sukhumā mudutalunahatthapādā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But in the future the mendicants will become delicate, with soft and tender hands and feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te mudukāsu seyyāsu tūlabibbohanāsu yāvasūriyuggamanā seyyaṃ kappissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ll sleep on soft beds with down pillows until the sun comes up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ māro pāpimā lacchati otāraṃ lacchati ārammaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Māra the Wicked will find a vulnerability and will get a foothold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kaliṅgarūpadhānā viharissāma appamattā ātāpino padhānasmin’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will live using wood blocks as pillows, and we will meditate diligently and keenly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
