<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>21.10-10. Theranāmakasutta  - 10. A Mendicant Named Senior </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">21.10. 10. Theranāmakasutta  - 10. A Mendicant Named Senior </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhuvagga  - 1. Monks </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu theranāmako ekavihārī ceva hoti ekavihārassa ca vaṇṇavādī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time there was a certain mendicant named Senior. He lived alone and praised living alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So eko gāmaṃ piṇḍāya pavisati eko paṭikkamati eko raho nisīdati eko caṅkamaṃ adhiṭṭhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He entered the village for alms alone, returned alone, sat in private alone, and concentrated on walking meditation alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha, bhante, aññataro bhikkhu theranāmako ekavihārī ekavihārassa ca vaṇṇavādī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, there’s a certain mendicant named Senior who lives alone and praises living alone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā aññataraṃ bhikkhuṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha said to a certain monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mama vacanena theraṃ bhikkhuṃ āmantehi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, monk, in my name tell the mendicant Senior that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘satthā taṃ, āvuso thera, āmantetī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teacher summons him.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato paṭissutvā yenāyasmā thero tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ theraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” that monk replied. He went to Venerable Senior and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“satthā taṃ, āvuso thera, āmantetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Senior, the teacher summons you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho āyasmā thero tassa bhikkhuno paṭissutvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ theraṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” that monk replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṃ kira tvaṃ, thera, ekavihārī ekavihārassa ca vaṇṇavādī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it really true, Senior, that you live alone and praise living alone?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana tvaṃ, thera, ekavihārī ekavihārassa ca vaṇṇavādī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But in what way do you live alone and praise living alone?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāhaṃ, bhante, eko gāmaṃ piṇḍāya pavisāmi eko paṭikkamāmi eko raho nisīdāmi eko caṅkamaṃ adhiṭṭhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, sir, I enter the village for alms alone, return alone, sit in private alone, and concentrate on walking meditation alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ khvāhaṃ, bhante, ekavihārī ekavihārassa ca vaṇṇavādī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how I live alone and praise living alone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Attheso, thera, ekavihāro neso natthīti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That is a kind of living alone, I don’t deny it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca, thera, yathā ekavihāro vitthārena paripuṇṇo hoti </span></p>
<p class="p3">But as to how living alone is fulfilled in detail, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” he replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathañca, thera, ekavihāro vitthārena paripuṇṇo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And how, Senior, is living alone fulfilled in detail? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, thera, yaṃ atītaṃ taṃ pahīnaṃ, yaṃ anāgataṃ taṃ paṭinissaṭṭhaṃ, paccuppannesu ca attabhāvapaṭilābhesu chandarāgo suppaṭivinīto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when what’s in the past is given up, what’s in the future is relinquished, and desire and greed for present incarnations is eliminated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, thera, ekavihāro vitthārena paripuṇṇo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how living alone is fulfilled in detail.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sabbābhibhuṃ sabbaviduṃ sumedhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The sage, champion, knower of all, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbesu dhammesu anūpalittaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is unsullied in the midst of all things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbañjahaṃ taṇhākkhaye vimuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s given up all, freed in the ending of craving: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamahaṃ naraṃ ekavihārīti brūmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I declare that man to be one who lives alone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
