<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>21.01-1. Kolitasutta  - 1. With Kolita </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">21.01. 1. Kolitasutta  - 1. With Kolita </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhuvagga  - 1. Monks </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho āyasmā mahāmoggallāno bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āvuso bhikkhave”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āvuso”ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato mahāmoggallānassa paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā mahāmoggallāno etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha mayhaṃ, āvuso, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just now, reverends, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyo tuṇhībhāvo, ariyo tuṇhībhāvoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They speak of this thing called “noble silence”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo nu kho ariyo tuṇhībhāvo’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What then is this noble silence?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ āvuso, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idha bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati ariyo tuṇhībhāvo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called noble silence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja vihariṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I was entering and remaining in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, iminā vihārena viharato vitakkasahagatā saññā manasikārā samudācaranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While I was in that meditation, perceptions and attentions accompanied by placing the mind beset me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho maṃ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘moggallāna moggallāna, mā, brāhmaṇa, ariyaṃ tuṇhībhāvaṃ pamādo, ariye tuṇhībhāve cittaṃ saṇṭhapehi, ariye tuṇhībhāve cittaṃ ekodibhāvaṃ karohi, ariye tuṇhībhāve cittaṃ samādahā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! Don’t neglect noble silence, brahmin! Settle your mind in noble silence; unify your mind and bring it to immersion in noble silence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, aparena samayena vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, after some time, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi taṃ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So if anyone should be rightly called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘satthārā anuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṃ patto’ti, mamaṃ taṃ sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">a disciple who attained to great direct knowledge with help from the Teacher, it’s me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘satthārā anuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṃ patto’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
