<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>21.06-6. Lakuṇḍakabhaddiyasutta  - 6. With Lakuṇṭaka Bhaddiya </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">21.06. 6. Lakuṇḍakabhaddiyasutta  - 6. With Lakuṇṭaka Bhaddiya </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhuvagga  - 1. Monks </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā lakuṇḍakabhaddiyo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Lakuṇṭaka Bhaddiya went to see the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ lakuṇḍakabhaddiyaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha saw him coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passatha no tumhe, bhikkhave, etaṃ bhikkhuṃ āgacchantaṃ dubbaṇṇaṃ duddasikaṃ okoṭimakaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ paribhūtarūpan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, do you you see this monk coming—ugly, unsightly, deformed, and despised by the mendicants?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eso kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mahiddhiko mahānubhāvo, na ca sā samāpatti sulabharūpā yā tena bhikkhunā asamāpannapubbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That mendicant is very mighty and powerful. It’s not easy to find an attainment that he has not already attained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa catthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṃ brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he has realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Haṃsā koñcā mayūrā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Geese, herons, and peacocks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthayo pasadā migā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">elephants and spotted deer—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe sīhassa bhāyanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">though their bodies are not equal, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi kāyasmiṃ tulyatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they all fear the lion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So it is for humans—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daharo cepi paññavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if a little person is wise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So hi tattha mahā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re the truly great one, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">neva bālo sarīravā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not the fool with a good body.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
