<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>21.08-8. Nandasutta  - 8. With Nanda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">21.08. 8. Nandasutta  - 8. With Nanda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhuvagga  - 1. Monks </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā nando bhagavato mātucchāputto ākoṭitapaccākoṭitāni cīvarāni pārupitvā akkhīni añjetvā acchaṃ pattaṃ gahetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ nandaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Nanda—the Buddha’s cousin on his mother’s side—dressed in nicely pressed and ironed robes, applied eyeshadow, and took a polished black bowl. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kho te taṃ, nanda, patirūpaṃ kulaputtassa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitassa, yaṃ tvaṃ ākoṭitapaccākoṭitāni cīvarāni pārupeyyāsi, akkhīni ca añjeyyāsi, acchañca pattaṃ dhāreyyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nanda, as a gentleman who has gone forth in faith from the lay life to homelessness, it’s not appropriate for you to dress in nicely pressed and ironed robes, apply eyeshadow, and carry a polished black bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ kho te, nanda, patirūpaṃ kulaputtassa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitassa, yaṃ tvaṃ āraññiko ca assasi, piṇḍapātiko ca paṃsukūliko ca kāmesu ca anapekkho vihareyyāsī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate for you to stay in the wilderness, eat only alms-food, wear rag robes, and live without concern for sensual pleasures.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kadāhaṃ nandaṃ passeyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When will I see Nanda </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraññaṃ paṃsukūlikaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the wilderness, wearing rag robes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātuñchena yāpentaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeding on scraps offered by strangers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmesu anapekkhinan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">unconcerned for sensual pleasures?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā nando aparena samayena āraññiko ca piṇḍapātiko ca paṃsukūliko ca kāmesu ca anapekkho vihāsīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then some time later Venerable Nanda stayed in the wilderness, ate only alms-food, wore rag robes, and lived without concern for sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
