<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>21.09-9. Tissasutta  - 9. With Tissa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">21.09. 9. Tissasutta  - 9. With Tissa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhuvagga  - 1. Monks </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā tisso bhagavato pitucchāputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi dukkhī dummano assūni pavattayamāno. Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ tissaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Tissa—the Buddha’s cousin on his father’s side—went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. He was miserable and sad, with tears flowing. Then the Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu kho tvaṃ, tissa, ekamantaṃ nisinno dukkhī dummano assūni pavattayamāno”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Tissa, why are you sitting there so miserable and sad, with tears flowing?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathā hi pana maṃ, bhante, bhikkhū samantā vācāyasannitodakena sañjambharimakaṃsū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, it’s because the mendicants on all sides provoke me with barbed words.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathāhi pana tvaṃ, tissa, vattā no ca vacanakkhamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s because you admonish others, but don’t accept admonition yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kho te taṃ, tissa, patirūpaṃ kulaputtassa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitassa, yaṃ tvaṃ vattā no ca vacanakkhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As a gentleman who has gone forth in faith from the lay life to homelessness, it’s not appropriate for you to admonish others without accepting admonition yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ kho te, tissa, patirūpaṃ kulaputtassa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitassa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate for you to </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yaṃ tvaṃ vattā ca assa vacanakkhamo cā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">admonish others and accept admonition yourself.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kujjhasi mā kujjhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why are you angry? Don’t be angry! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkodho tissa te varaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s better to not be angry, Tissa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhamānamakkhavinayatthañhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For this spiritual life is lived </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tissa brahmacariyaṃ vussatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in order to remove anger, conceit, and denigration.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
