<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.031-40-31  - 31 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.031-40. 31  - 31 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Adantavagga  - 4. Wild </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ adantaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not tamed, is so very harmful as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, adantaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wild mind is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">32 </span></p>
<p class="p3">32 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ dantaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is tamed, is so very beneficial as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, dantaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A tamed mind is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">33 </span></p>
<p class="p3">33 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ aguttaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not guarded, is so very harmful as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, aguttaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An unguarded mind is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">34 </span></p>
<p class="p3">34 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ guttaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is guarded, is so very beneficial as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, guttaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A guarded mind is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">35 </span></p>
<p class="p3">35 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ arakkhitaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not protected, is so very harmful as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, arakkhitaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An unprotected mind is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">36 </span></p>
<p class="p3">36 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ rakkhitaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is protected, is so very beneficial as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, rakkhitaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A protected mind is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">37 </span></p>
<p class="p3">37 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ asaṃvutaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not restrained, is so very harmful as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, asaṃvutaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An unrestrained mind is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">38 </span></p>
<p class="p3">38 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ saṃvutaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is restrained, is so very beneficial as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃvutaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A restrained mind is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">39 </span></p>
<p class="p3">39 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ adantaṃ aguttaṃ arakkhitaṃ asaṃvutaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is not tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained, is so very harmful as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, adantaṃ aguttaṃ arakkhitaṃ asaṃvutaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained mind is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">40 </span></p>
<p class="p3">40 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ dantaṃ guttaṃ rakkhitaṃ saṃvutaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained, is so very beneficial as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, dantaṃ guttaṃ rakkhitaṃ saṃvutaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained mind is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adantavaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
