<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.209-218-209–218  - 209–218 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.209-218. 209–218  - 209–218 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Tatiyavagga  - 16. Third </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, mama sāvakānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ sikkhākāmānaṃ yadidaṃ rāhulo. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The foremost of my monk disciples who want to train is Rāhula. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Saddhāpabbajitānaṃ yadidaṃ raṭṭhapālo. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who went forth out of faith is Raṭṭhapāla. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Paṭhamaṃ salākaṃ gaṇhantānaṃ yadidaṃ kuṇḍadhāno. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who are the first to pick up a ballot slip is Kuṇḍadhāna. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Paṭibhānavantānaṃ yadidaṃ vaṅgīso. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who are eloquent poets is Vaṅgīsa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Samantapāsādikānaṃ yadidaṃ upaseno vaṅgantaputto. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who are impressive all around is Upasena Vaṅgantaputta. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Senāsanapaññāpakānaṃ yadidaṃ dabbo mallaputto. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who assign lodgings is Dabba Mallaputta. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… devatānaṃ piyamanāpānaṃ yadidaṃ pilindavaccho. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who are beloved of the deities is Pilindavaccha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Khippābhiññānaṃ yadidaṃ bāhiyo dārucīriyo. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… with swift insight is Bāhiya Dārucīriya. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Cittakathikānaṃ yadidaṃ kumārakassapo. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… with brilliant speech is Kassapa the Prince. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… Paṭisambhidāpattānaṃ yadidaṃ mahākoṭṭhito”ti. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">… who have attained the methods of textual analysis is Mahākoṭṭhita.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
