<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.098-139-98  - 98 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.098-139. 98  - 98 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Dutiyapamādādivagga  - 10. Negligence (2nd) </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjhattikaṃ, bhikkhave, aṅganti karitvā nāññaṃ ekaṅgampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, pamādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamādo, bhikkhave, mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Negligence is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">99 </span></p>
<p class="p3">99 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjhattikaṃ, bhikkhave, aṅganti karitvā nāññaṃ ekaṅgampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, appamādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very beneficial as diligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamādo, bhikkhave, mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Diligence is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">100 </span></p>
<p class="p3">100 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjhattikaṃ, bhikkhave, aṅganti karitvā nāññaṃ ekaṅgampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, kosajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as laziness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosajjaṃ, bhikkhave, mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Laziness is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">101 </span></p>
<p class="p3">101 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjhattikaṃ, bhikkhave, aṅganti karitvā nāññaṃ ekaṅgampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, vīriyārambho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very beneficial as arousing energy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyārambho, bhikkhave, mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Arousing energy is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">102–109 </span></p>
<p class="p3">102–109 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjhattikaṃ, bhikkhave, aṅganti karitvā nāññaṃ ekaṅgampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, mahicchatā … pe … appicchatā … asantuṭṭhitā … santuṭṭhitā … ayonisomanasikāro … yonisomanasikāro … asampajaññaṃ … sampajaññaṃ … dvādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as having many wishes … having few wishes … lack of contentment … contentment … improper attention … proper attention … lack of situational awareness … situational awareness …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">110 </span></p>
<p class="p3">110 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bāhiraṃ, bhikkhave, aṅganti karitvā nāññaṃ ekaṅgampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, pāpamittatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as bad friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāpamittatā, bhikkhave, mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bad friends are very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Terasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">111 </span></p>
<p class="p3">111 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bāhiraṃ, bhikkhave, aṅganti karitvā nāññaṃ ekaṅgampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, kalyāṇamittatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very beneficial as good friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalyāṇamittatā, bhikkhave, mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good friends are very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cuddasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">112 </span></p>
<p class="p3">112 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjhattikaṃ, bhikkhave, aṅganti karitvā nāññaṃ ekaṅgampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, anuyogo akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ, ananuyogo kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as pursuing bad habits and not good habits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyogo, bhikkhave, akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ, ananuyogo kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pursuing bad habits and not good habits is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pannarasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">113 </span></p>
<p class="p3">113 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjhattikaṃ, bhikkhave, aṅganti karitvā nāññaṃ ekaṅgampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, anuyogo kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ, ananuyogo akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very beneficial as pursuing good habits and not bad habits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyogo, bhikkhave, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ, ananuyogo akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pursuing good habits and not bad habits is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Soḷasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">114 </span></p>
<p class="p3">114 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yo evaṃ saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, pamādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching like negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamādo, bhikkhave, saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Negligence leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattarasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">115 </span></p>
<p class="p3">115 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yo evaṃ saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, appamādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like diligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamādo, bhikkhave, saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Diligence leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhārasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">116 </span></p>
<p class="p3">116 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yo evaṃ saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, kosajjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching like laziness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosajjaṃ, bhikkhave, saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Laziness leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekūnavīsatimaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">117 </span></p>
<p class="p3">117 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yo evaṃ saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, vīriyārambho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like arousing energy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyārambho, bhikkhave, saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Arousing energy leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīsatimaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">118–128 </span></p>
<p class="p3">118–128 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yo evaṃ saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, mahicchatā … pe … appicchatā … asantuṭṭhitā … santuṭṭhitā … ayonisomanasikāro … yonisomanasikāro … asampajaññaṃ … sampajaññaṃ … pāpamittatā … kalyāṇamittatā … anuyogo akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ, ananuyogo kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching like having many wishes … having few wishes … lack of contentment … contentment … improper attention … proper attention … lack of situational awareness … situational awareness … bad friends … good friends … pursuing bad habits and not good habits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyogo, bhikkhave, akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ, ananuyogo kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pursuing bad habits and not good habits leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekattiṃsatimaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">129 </span></p>
<p class="p3">129 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yo evaṃ saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, anuyogo kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ, ananuyogo akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like pursuing good habits and not bad habits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyogo, bhikkhave, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ, ananuyogo akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pursuing good habits and not bad habits leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bāttiṃsatimaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catukkoṭikaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">130 </span></p>
<p class="p3">130 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū adhammaṃ dhammoti dīpenti te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū bahujanaahitāya paṭipannā bahujanaasukhāya, bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is not the teaching as the teaching are acting for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuñca te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū apuññaṃ pasavanti, te cimaṃ saddhammaṃ antaradhāpentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They make much bad karma and make the true teaching disappear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tettiṃsatimaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">131 </span></p>
<p class="p3">131 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū dhammaṃ adhammoti dīpenti te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū bahujanaahitāya paṭipannā bahujanaasukhāya, bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is the teaching as not the teaching are acting for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuñca te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū apuññaṃ pasavanti, te cimaṃ saddhammaṃ antaradhāpentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They make much bad karma and make the true teaching disappear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catuttiṃsatimaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">132–139 </span></p>
<p class="p3">132–139 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū avinayaṃ vinayoti dīpenti … pe … vinayaṃ avinayoti dīpenti … pe … abhāsitaṃ alapitaṃ tathāgatena bhāsitaṃ lapitaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti … pe … bhāsitaṃ lapitaṃ tathāgatena abhāsitaṃ alapitaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti … pe … anāciṇṇaṃ tathāgatena āciṇṇaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti … pe … āciṇṇaṃ tathāgatena anāciṇṇaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti … pe … apaññattaṃ tathāgatena paññattaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti … pe … paññattaṃ tathāgatena apaññattaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Those mendicants who explain what is not found in the texts on monastic training as found in those texts … what is found in the texts on monastic training as not found in those texts … what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One … what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One … what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One … what was practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One … what was not prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One … what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū bahujanaahitāya paṭipannā bahujanaasukhāya, bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are acting for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuñca te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū apuññaṃ pasavanti, te cimaṃ saddhammaṃ antaradhāpentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They make much bad karma and make the true teaching disappear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvācattālīsatimaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyapamādādivaggo dasamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
