<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.268-277-268  - 268 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.268-277. 268  - 268 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Paṭhamavagga  - 21. First </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ diṭṭhisampanno puggalo kañci saṅkhāraṃ niccato upagaccheyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person accomplished in view to take any condition as permanent. That is not possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ puthujjano kañci saṅkhāraṃ niccato upagaccheyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for an ordinary person to take some condition as permanent. That is possible.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">269 </span></p>
<p class="p3">269 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ diṭṭhisampanno puggalo kañci saṅkhāraṃ sukhato upagaccheyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person accomplished in view to take any condition as pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ puthujjano kañci saṅkhāraṃ sukhato upagaccheyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for an ordinary person to take some condition as pleasant.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">270 </span></p>
<p class="p3">270 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ diṭṭhisampanno puggalo kañci dhammaṃ attato upagaccheyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person accomplished in view to take anything as self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ puthujjano kañci dhammaṃ attato upagaccheyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for an ordinary person to take something as self.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">271 </span></p>
<p class="p3">271 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ diṭṭhisampanno puggalo mātaraṃ jīvitā voropeyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person accomplished in view to murder their mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ puthujjano mātaraṃ jīvitā voropeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for an ordinary person to murder their mother.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">272 </span></p>
<p class="p3">272 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ diṭṭhisampanno puggalo pitaraṃ jīvitā voropeyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person accomplished in view to murder their father. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ puthujjano pitaraṃ jīvitā voropeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for an ordinary person to murder their father.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">273 </span></p>
<p class="p3">273 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ diṭṭhisampanno puggalo arahantaṃ jīvitā voropeyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person accomplished in view to murder a perfected one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ puthujjano arahantaṃ jīvitā voropeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for an ordinary person to murder a perfected one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">274 </span></p>
<p class="p3">274 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ diṭṭhisampanno puggalo tathāgatassa paduṭṭhacitto lohitaṃ uppādeyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person accomplished in view to injure a Realized One with malicious intent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ puthujjano tathāgatassa paduṭṭhacitto lohitaṃ uppādeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for an ordinary person to injure a Realized One with malicious intent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">275 </span></p>
<p class="p3">275 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ diṭṭhisampanno puggalo saṅghaṃ bhindeyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person accomplished in view to cause a schism in the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ puthujjano saṅghaṃ bhindeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for an ordinary person to cause a schism in the Saṅgha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">276 </span></p>
<p class="p3">276 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ diṭṭhisampanno puggalo aññaṃ satthāraṃ uddiseyya. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person accomplished in view to acknowledge another teacher. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ puthujjano aññaṃ satthāraṃ uddiseyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for an ordinary person to acknowledge another teacher.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">277 </span></p>
<p class="p3">277 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ ekissā lokadhātuyā dve arahanto sammāsambuddhā apubbaṃ acarimaṃ uppajjeyyuṃ. Netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for two perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas to arise in the same solar system at the same time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ ekissā lokadhātuyā ekova arahaṃ sammāsambuddho uppajjeyya. Ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for just one perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, to arise in one solar system.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
