<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.021-30-21  - 21 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.021-30. 21  - 21 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Akammaniyavagga  - 3. Useless </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ abhāvitaṃ akammaniyaṃ hoti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed like this, is as useless as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, abhāvitaṃ akammaniyaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An undeveloped mind is useless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">22 </span></p>
<p class="p3">22 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ kammaniyaṃ hoti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed like this, is as workable as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvitaṃ kammaniyaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A developed mind is workable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">23 </span></p>
<p class="p3">23 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ abhāvitaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed like this, is so very harmful as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, abhāvitaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An undeveloped mind is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">24 </span></p>
<p class="p3">24 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed like this, is so very beneficial as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvitaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A developed mind is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">25 </span></p>
<p class="p3">25 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ abhāvitaṃ apātubhūtaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed, with such untapped potential, is so very harmful as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, abhāvitaṃ apātubhūtaṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An undeveloped mind, with untapped potential, is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">26 </span></p>
<p class="p3">26 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ pātubhūtaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed, with its potential realized, is so very beneficial as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvitaṃ pātubhūtaṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A developed mind, with its potential realized, is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">27 </span></p>
<p class="p3">27 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ abhāvitaṃ abahulīkataṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed and cultivated, is so very harmful as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, abhāvitaṃ abahulīkataṃ mahato anatthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An undeveloped and uncultivated mind is very harmful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">28 </span></p>
<p class="p3">28 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattati yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and cultivated, is so very beneficial as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ mahato atthāya saṃvattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A developed and cultivated mind is very beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">29 </span></p>
<p class="p3">29 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ abhāvitaṃ abahulīkataṃ dukkhādhivahaṃ hoti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed and cultivated, brings such suffering as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, abhāvitaṃ abahulīkataṃ dukkhādhivahaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An undeveloped and uncultivated mind brings suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">30 </span></p>
<p class="p3">30 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi yaṃ evaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ sukhādhivahaṃ hoti yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and cultivated, brings such happiness as the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ sukhādhivahaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A developed and cultivated mind brings happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akammaniyavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
