<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn033-Mahāgopālakasutta  - The Longer Discourse on the Cowherd </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Mahāgopālakasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">The Longer Discourse on the Cowherd </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 33  - Middle Discourses 33 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ekādasahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato gopālako abhabbo gogaṇaṃ pariharituṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can’t maintain and expand a herd of cattle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi ekādasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eleven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, gopālako na rūpaññū hoti, na lakkhaṇakusalo hoti, na āsāṭikaṃ hāretā hoti, na vaṇaṃ paṭicchādetā hoti, na dhūmaṃ kattā hoti, na titthaṃ jānāti, na pītaṃ jānāti, na vīthiṃ jānāti, na gocarakusalo hoti anavasesadohī ca hoti. Ye te usabhā gopitaro gopariṇāyakā te na atirekapūjāya pūjetā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a cowherd doesn’t know form, is unskilled in characteristics, doesn’t pick out flies’ eggs, doesn’t dress wounds, doesn’t smoke out pests, doesn’t know the ford, doesn’t know satisfaction, doesn’t know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks dry, and doesn’t show extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and leaders of the herd. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, ekādasahi aṅgehi samannāgato gopālako abhabbo gogaṇaṃ pariharituṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A cowherd with these eleven factors can’t maintain and expand a herd of cattle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ekādasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu abhabbo imasmiṃ dhammavinaye vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can’t achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi ekādasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eleven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na rūpaññū hoti, na lakkhaṇakusalo hoti, na āsāṭikaṃ hāretā hoti, na vaṇaṃ paṭicchādetā hoti, na dhūmaṃ kattā hoti, na titthaṃ jānāti, na pītaṃ jānāti, na vīthiṃ jānāti, na gocarakusalo hoti, anavasesadohī ca hoti. Ye te bhikkhū therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā saṃghapitaro saṃghapariṇāyakā te na atirekapūjāya pūjetā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t know form, is unskilled in characteristics, doesn’t pick out flies’ eggs, doesn’t dress wounds, doesn’t smoke out pests, doesn’t know the ford, doesn’t know satisfaction, doesn’t know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks dry, and doesn’t show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na rūpaññū hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant not know form? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yaṃ kiñci rūpaṃ sabbaṃ rūpaṃ ‘cattāri mahābhūtāni, catunnañca mahābhūtānaṃ upādāyarūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t truly understand that all form is the four primary elements, or form derived from the four primary elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na rūpaññū hoti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na lakkhaṇakusalo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant not skilled in characteristics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘kammalakkhaṇo bālo, kammalakkhaṇo paṇḍito’ti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t understand that a fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na lakkhaṇakusalo hoti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant isn’t skilled in characteristics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na āsāṭikaṃ hāretā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant not pick out flies’ eggs? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu uppannaṃ kāmavitakkaṃ adhivāseti, nappajahati na vinodeti na byantī karoti na anabhāvaṃ gameti. Uppannaṃ byāpādavitakkaṃ … pe … uppannaṃ vihiṃsāvitakkaṃ … pe … uppannuppanne pāpake akusale dhamme adhivāseti, nappajahati na vinodeti na byantī karoti na anabhāvaṃ gameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant tolerates a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen. They don’t give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na āsāṭikaṃ hāretā hoti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant doesn’t pick out flies’ eggs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na vaṇaṃ paṭicchādetā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant not dress wounds? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā nimittaggāhī hoti anubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya na paṭipajjati, na rakkhati cakkhundriyaṃ, cakkhundriye na saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since the faculty of sight is left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion become overwhelming. They don’t practice restraint, they don’t protect the faculty of sight, and they don’t achieve its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear a sound with their ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smell an odor with their nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">taste a flavor with their tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feel a touch with their body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya nimittaggāhī hoti anubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">know a thought with their mind, they get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya na paṭipajjati, na rakkhati manindriyaṃ, manindriye na saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since the faculty of the mind is left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion become overwhelming. They don’t practice restraint, they don’t protect the faculty of the mind, and they don’t achieve its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na vaṇaṃ paṭicchādetā hoti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant doesn’t dress wounds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na dhūmaṃ kattā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant not smoke out pests? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ na vitthārena paresaṃ desetā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t teach others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na dhūmaṃ kattā hoti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant doesn’t smoke out pests. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na titthaṃ jānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant not know the ford? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te bhikkhū bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā, te kālena kālaṃ upasaṅkamitvā na paripucchati, na paripañhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t from time to time go up to those mendicants who are very learned—knowledgeable in the scriptures, who have memorized the teachings, the texts on monastic training, and the outlines—and ask them questions: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ, bhante, kathaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Why, sir, does it say this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa ko attho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does that mean?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa te āyasmanto avivaṭañceva na vivaranti, anuttānīkatañca na uttānīkaronti, anekavihitesu ca kaṅkhāṭhānīyesu dhammesu kaṅkhaṃ na paṭivinodenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those venerables don’t clarify what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na titthaṃ jānāti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know the ford. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na pītaṃ jānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant not know satisfaction? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye desiyamāne na labhati atthavedaṃ, na labhati dhammavedaṃ, na labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being taught, finds no joy in the meaning and the teaching, and finds no joy connected with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na pītaṃ jānāti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know satisfaction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na vīthiṃ jānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant not know the trail? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t truly understand the noble eightfold path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na vīthiṃ jānāti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know the trail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na gocarakusalo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant not skilled in pastures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro satipaṭṭhāne yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t truly understand the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na gocarakusalo hoti. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is not skilled in pastures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anavasesadohī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant milk dry? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṃ saddhā gahapatikā abhihaṭṭhuṃ pavārenti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārehi, tatra bhikkhu mattaṃ na jānāti paṭiggahaṇāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is invited by a householder to accept robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, and that mendicant doesn’t know moderation in accepting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anavasesadohī hoti. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant milks dry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te bhikkhū therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā saṅghapitaro saṅghapariṇāyakā te na atirekapūjāya pūjetā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant not show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te bhikkhū therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā saṅghapitaro saṅghapariṇāyakā, tesu na mettaṃ kāyakammaṃ paccupaṭṭhāpeti āvi ceva raho ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t consistently treat senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na mettaṃ vacīkammaṃ paccupaṭṭhāpeti āvi ceva raho ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na mettaṃ manokammaṃ paccupaṭṭhāpeti āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te bhikkhū therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā saṅghapitaro saṅghapariṇāyakā te na atirekapūjāya pūjetā hoti. (11) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant doesn’t show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, ekādasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu abhabbo imasmiṃ dhammavinaye vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these eleven qualities can’t achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato gopālako bhabbo gogaṇaṃ pariharituṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A cowherd with eleven factors can maintain and expand a herd of cattle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi ekādasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eleven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, gopālako rūpaññū hoti, lakkhaṇakusalo hoti, āsāṭikaṃ hāretā hoti, vaṇaṃ paṭicchādetā hoti, dhūmaṃ kattā hoti, titthaṃ jānāti, pītaṃ jānāti, vīthiṃ jānāti, gocarakusalo hoti, sāvasesadohī ca hoti. Ye te usabhā gopitaro gopariṇāyakā te atirekapūjāya pūjetā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a cowherd knows form, is skilled in characteristics, picks out flies’ eggs, dresses wounds, smokes out pests, knows the ford, knows satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in pastures, doesn’t milk dry, and shows extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and leaders of the herd. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, ekādasahi aṅgehi samannāgato gopālako bhabbo gogaṇaṃ pariharituṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A cowherd with these eleven factors can maintain and expand a herd of cattle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ekādasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu bhabbo imasmiṃ dhammavinaye vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can achieve growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi ekādasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eleven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu rūpaññū hoti, lakkhaṇakusalo hoti, āsāṭikaṃ hāretā hoti, vaṇaṃ paṭicchādetā hoti, dhūmaṃ kattā hoti, titthaṃ jānāti, pītaṃ jānāti, vīthiṃ jānāti, gocarakusalo hoti, sāvasesadohī ca hoti. Ye te bhikkhū therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā saṅghapitaro saṅghapariṇāyakā te atirekapūjāya pūjetā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant knows form, is skilled in characteristics, picks out flies’ eggs, dresses wounds, smokes out pests, knows the ford, knows satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in pastures, doesn’t milk dry, and shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu rūpaññū hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant know form? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yaṃ kiñci rūpaṃ sabbaṃ rūpaṃ ‘cattāri mahābhūtāni, catunnañca mahābhūtānaṃ upādāyarūpan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant truly understands that all form is the four primary elements, or form derived from the four primary elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu rūpaññū hoti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant knows form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu lakkhaṇakusalo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant skilled in characteristics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kammalakkhaṇo bālo, kammalakkhaṇo paṇḍitoti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant understands that a fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu lakkhaṇakusalo hoti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is skilled in characteristics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āsāṭikaṃ hāretā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant pick out flies’ eggs? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu uppannaṃ kāmavitakkaṃ nādhivāseti, pajahati vinodeti byantī karoti anabhāvaṃ gameti. Uppannaṃ byāpādavitakkaṃ … pe … uppannaṃ vihiṃsāvitakkaṃ … pe … uppannuppanne pāpake akusale dhamme nādhivāseti, pajahati vinodeti byantī karoti anabhāvaṃ gameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They don’t tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āsāṭikaṃ hāretā hoti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant picks out flies’ eggs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vaṇaṃ paṭicchādetā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant dress wounds? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati, rakkhati cakkhundriyaṃ, cakkhundriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear a sound with their ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">smell an odor with their nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">taste a flavor with their tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feel a touch with their body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">know a thought with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati, rakkhati manindriyaṃ, manindriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vaṇaṃ paṭicchādetā hoti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant dresses wounds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhūmaṃ kattā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant smoke out pests? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena paresaṃ desetā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant teaches others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhūmaṃ kattā hoti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant smokes out pests. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu titthaṃ jānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant know the ford? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te bhikkhū bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā te kālena kālaṃ upasaṅkamitvā paripucchati, paripañhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when from time to time a mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned—knowledgeable in the scriptures, who have memorized the teachings, the texts on monastic training, and the outlines—and asks them questions: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ, bhante, kathaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Why, sir, does it say this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa ko attho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What does that mean?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa te āyasmanto avivaṭañceva vivaranti, anuttānīkatañca uttānīkaronti, anekavihitesu ca kaṅkhāṭhānīyesu dhammesu kaṅkhaṃ paṭivinodenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu titthaṃ jānāti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant knows the ford. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca bhikkhave, bhikkhu pītaṃ jānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant know satisfaction? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye desiyamāne labhati atthavedaṃ, labhati dhammavedaṃ, labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being taught, finds joy in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pītaṃ jānāti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant knows satisfaction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vīthiṃ jānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant know the trail? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant truly understands the noble eightfold path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vīthiṃ jānāti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant knows the trail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu gocarakusalo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant skilled in pastures? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro satipaṭṭhāne yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant truly understands the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu gocarakusalo hoti. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is skilled in pastures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sāvasesadohī hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant not milk dry? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṃ saddhā gahapatikā abhihaṭṭhuṃ pavārenti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is invited by a householder to accept robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra bhikkhu mattaṃ jānāti paṭiggahaṇāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that mendicant knows moderation in accepting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sāvasesadohī hoti. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant doesn’t milk dry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te bhikkhū therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā saṅghapitaro saṅghapariṇāyakā, te atirekapūjāya pūjetā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te bhikkhū therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā saṅghapitaro saṅghapariṇāyakā tesu mettaṃ kāyakammaṃ paccupaṭṭhāpeti āvi ceva raho ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant consistently treats senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mettaṃ vacīkammaṃ paccupaṭṭhāpeti āvi ceva raho ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mettaṃ manokammaṃ paccupaṭṭhāpeti āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te bhikkhū therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā saṅghapitaro saṅghapariṇāyakā te atirekapūjāya pūjetā hoti. (11) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, ekādasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu bhabbo imasmiṃ dhammavinaye vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these eleven qualities can achieve growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāgopālakasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
