<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.077-86-77  - 77 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.077-86. 77  - 77 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Sanimittavagga  - 8. With a Foundation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sanimittā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no animittā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a foundation, not without a foundation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva nimittassa pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up that foundation, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">78 </span></p>
<p class="p3">78 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sanidānā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no anidānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a source, not without a source. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva nidānassa pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up that source, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">79 </span></p>
<p class="p3">79 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sahetukā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no ahetukā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a cause, not without a cause. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva hetussa pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up that cause, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">80 </span></p>
<p class="p3">80 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sasaṅkhārā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no asaṅkhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with conditions, not without conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃyeva saṅkhārānaṃ pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up those conditions, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">81 </span></p>
<p class="p3">81 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sappaccayā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no appaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a reason, not without a reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva paccayassa pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up that reason, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">82 </span></p>
<p class="p3">82 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sarūpā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no arūpā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with form, not without form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva rūpassa pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up that form, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">83 </span></p>
<p class="p3">83 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Savedanā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no avedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with feeling, not without feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassāyeva vedanāya pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up that feeling, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">84 </span></p>
<p class="p3">84 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sasaññā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no asaññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with perception, not without perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassāyeva saññāya pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up that perception, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">85 </span></p>
<p class="p3">85 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saviññāṇā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no aviññāṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with consciousness, not without consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva viññāṇassa pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up that consciousness, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">86 </span></p>
<p class="p3">86 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saṅkhatārammaṇā, bhikkhave, uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, no asaṅkhatārammaṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a conditioned basis, not without a conditioned basis. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva saṅkhatassa pahānā evaṃ te pāpakā akusalā dhammā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By giving up that conditioned basis, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sanimittavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
