<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.310-479-310–321  - 310–321 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.310-479. 310–321  - 310–321 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">19. Rāgapeyyāla  - 19. Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rāgassa, bhikkhave, abhiññāya dve dhammā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“For insight into greed, two things should be developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samatho ca vipassanā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Serenity and discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgassa, bhikkhave, abhiññāya ime dve dhammā bhāvetabbā”ti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">For insight into greed, these two things should be developed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rāgassa, bhikkhave, pariññāya … parikkhayāya … pahānāya … khayāya … vayāya … virāgāya … nirodhāya … cāgāya … paṭinissaggāya dve dhammā bhāvetabbā … pe … (2–10.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“For the complete understanding … finishing … giving up … ending … vanishing … fading away … cessation … giving away … letting go of greed, two things should be developed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">322–479 </span></p>
<p class="p3">322–479 </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dosassa … pe … mohassa … kodhassa … upanāhassa … makkhassa … paḷāsassa … issāya … macchariyassa … māyāya … sāṭheyyassa … thambhassa … sārambhassa … mānassa … atimānassa … madassa … pamādassa … abhiññāya … pariññāya … parikkhayāya … pahānāya … khayāya … vayāya … virāgāya … nirodhāya … cāgāya … paṭinissaggāya dve dhammā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Of hate … delusion … anger … hostility … offensiveness … contempt … jealousy … stinginess … deceit … deviousness … obstinacy … aggression … conceit … arrogance … vanity … negligence … for insight … complete understanding … finishing … giving up … ending … vanishing … fading away … cessation … giving away … letting go … two things should be developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samatho ca vipassanā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Serenity and discernment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamādassa, bhikkhave, paṭinissaggāya ime dve dhammā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the letting go of negligence, these two things should be developed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgapeyyālaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukanipātapāḷi niṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Book of the Twos is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
