<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.230-279-230–279  - 230–279 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.230-279. 230–279  - 230–279 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Akusalapeyyāla  - 17. Abbreviated Texts Beginning with the Unskillful </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā akusalā … dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā kusalā … dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā sāvajjā … dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā anavajjā … dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā dukkhudrayā … dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā sukhudrayā … dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā dukkhavipākā … dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā sukhavipākā … dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā sabyābajjhā … dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā abyābajjhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These two things are unskillful … are skillful … are blameworthy … are blameless … have suffering as outcome … have happiness as outcome … result in suffering … result in happiness … are hurtful … are not hurtful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dve? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What two? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkodho ca anupanāho ca … amakkho ca apaḷāso ca … anissā ca amacchariyañca … amāyā ca asāṭheyyañca … hirī ca ottappañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Freedom from anger and hostility … freedom from offensiveness and contempt … freedom from jealousy and stinginess … freedom from deceit and deviousness … conscience and prudence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dve dhammā abyābajjhā”ti. (1–50.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two things that are not hurtful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akusalapeyyālaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
