<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Paṭhamabhāga - Part one </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr2.4_root-pli-ms.j. Paṭhamabhāga - Part one </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">4. Saṅgahavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">4. The section on “being found in” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassutāya bhikkhuniyā avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyantiyā āpattiyo sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses for a lustful nun consenting to a lustful man making physical contact with her, in how many of the seven classes of offenses are they found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassutāya bhikkhuniyā avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyantiyā āpattiyo sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ tīhi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are found in three: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā pārājikāpattikkhandhena, siyā thullaccayāpattikkhandhena, siyā dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be in the class of offenses entailing expulsion; they may be in the class of serious offenses; they may be in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjantiyā āpattiyo sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses for asking for curd and then eating it, in how many of the seven classes of offenses are they found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjantiyā āpattiyo sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ dvīhi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are found in two: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā pāṭidesanīyāpattikkhandhena, siyā dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be in the class of offenses entailing acknowledgment; they may be in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgahavāro niṭṭhito catuttho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth section on “being found in” is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
