<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Dutiyabhāga - Part two </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr1.14_root-pli-ms.j. Dutiyabhāga - Part two </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">6. Adhikaraṇavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">6. The section on legal issues </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā āpattiyo catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses that are a result of having sexual intercourse, to which of the four kinds of legal issue do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā āpattiyo catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ āpattādhikaraṇaṁ …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are legal issues arising from an offense. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā āpatti catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offense that is a result of, out of disrespect, defecating, urinating, or spitting in water, to which of the four kinds of legal issues does it belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā āpatti catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ āpattādhikaraṇaṁ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a legal issue arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhikaraṇavāro niṭṭhito chaṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth section on legal issues is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
