<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1. Codanādipucchāvissajjanā - 1. Questions and responses on accusing, etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr12_root-pli-ms.j. 1. Codanādipucchāvissajjanā - 1. Questions and responses on accusing, etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Codanā kimatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘What is the purpose of accusing? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāraṇā kissa kāraṇā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is there reminding? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho kimatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the purpose of the Sangha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Matikammaṁ pana kissa kāraṇā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is there the taking of advice?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Codanā sāraṇatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The purpose of accusing is reminding, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niggahatthāya sāraṇā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">The purpose of reminding is restraint; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho pariggahatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The purpose of the Sangha is scrutiny, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Matikammaṁ pana pāṭiyekkaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But taking advice is individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā kho turito abhaṇi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t speak hastily, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā kho caṇḍikato bhaṇi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t speak fiercely; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā kho paṭighaṁ janayi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t be hostile—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace anuvijjako tuvaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If you are an investigator. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā kho sahasā abhaṇi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t speak fast, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ viggāhikaṁ anatthasaṁhitaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Argumentative speech is not beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutte vinaye anulome,</span></p>
<p class="p3">In line with the discourses and the Monastic Law, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññatte anulomike.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In line with what has been laid down, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyogavattaṁ nisāmaya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Consider carefully the proper procedure of examination, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kusalena buddhimatā kataṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">As formulated by the skilled Awakened One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suvuttaṁ sikkhāpadānulomikaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Well-spoken in line with the training rules—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gatiṁ na nāsento samparāyikaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Do not ruin your future rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hitesī anuyuñjassu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You should seek what is beneficial, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālenatthūpasaṁhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the right time, what is connected with the goal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cuditassa ca codakassa ca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The statements of the accuser and the accused, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahasā vohāraṁ mā padhāresi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Do not consider them hastily: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Codako āha āpannoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the accuser says the accused has offended, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cuditako āha anāpannoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the accused says he has not, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho anukkhipanto,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, both moving along, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiññānusandhitena kāraye;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should be dealt with in line with their admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiññā lajjīsu katā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The conscientious admit their faults, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alajjīsu evaṁ na vijjati;</span></p>
<p class="p3">But there is no such things among the shameless; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahumpi alajjī bhāseyya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">For even if the shameless should speak a lot, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vattānusandhitena kāraye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They should be dealt with in line with their conduct.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alajjī kīdiso hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the shameless like, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiññā yassa na rūhati;</span></p>
<p class="p3">In that an admission is not effective? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañca tāhaṁ pucchāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">I ask you this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kīdiso vuccati alajjī puggalo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">What are they like, the people called shameless? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañcicca āpattiṁ āpajjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They intentionally commit offenses, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattiṁ parigūhati;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Hide their offense, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agatigamanañca gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And go to a bad rebirth—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati alajjīpuggalo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such people are called shameless.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṁ ahampi jānāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I too know the truth—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati alajjīpuggalo;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such people are called shameless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññañca tāhaṁ pucchāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And may I ask you something else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kīdiso vuccati lajjīpuggalo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">What are they like, the people called conscientious?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañcicca āpattiṁ nāpajjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They do not intentionally commit offenses, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattiṁ na parigūhati;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor do they hide them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agatigamanaṁ na gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they do not go to a bad rebirth—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati lajjīpuggalo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such people are called conscientious.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṁ ahampi jānāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I too know the truth—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati lajjīpuggalo;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such people are called conscientious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññañca tāhaṁ pucchāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And may I ask you something else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kīdiso vuccati adhammacodako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">What are they like, those who accuse illegitimately?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akālena codeti abhūtena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They accuse at the wrong time, untruthfully, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusena anatthasaṁhitena;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Harshly, without benefit; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dosantaro codeti no mettācitto,</span></p>
<p class="p3">They accuse with a mind of ill will, not a mind of good will—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati adhammacodako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a person is called one who accuses illegitimately.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṁ ahampi jānāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I too know the truth—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati adhammacodako;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a person is called one who accuses illegitimately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññañca tāhaṁ pucchāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And may I ask you something else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kīdiso vuccati dhammacodako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">What are they like, those who accuse legitimately?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālena codeti bhūtena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They accuse at the right time, truthfully, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṇhena atthasaṁhitena;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gently, beneficially; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mettācitto codeti no dosantaro,</span></p>
<p class="p3">They accuse with a mind of good will, not a mind of ill will—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati dhammacodako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a person is called one who accuses legitimately.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṁ ahampi jānāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I too know the truth—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati dhammacodako;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a person is called one who accuses legitimately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññañca tāhaṁ pucchāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And may I ask you something else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kīdiso vuccati bālacodako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">What are they like, the people called ignorant accusers?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbāparaṁ na jānāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They do not know the sequence; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbāparassa akovido;</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are ignorant about it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusandhivacanapathaṁ na jānāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">They do not know the sequence of statements; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusandhivacanapathassa akovido;</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are ignorant about it—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati bālacodako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such people are called ignorant accusers.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṁ ahampi jānāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I too know the truth—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati bālacodako;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such people are called ignorant accusers.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññañca tāhaṁ pucchāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And may I ask you something else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kīdiso vuccati paṇḍitacodako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">What are they like, the people called learned accusers?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbāparampi jānāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They know the sequence; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbāparassa kovido;</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are knowledgeable about it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusandhivacanapathaṁ jānāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">They know the sequence of statements; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusandhivacanapathassa kovido;</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are knowledgeable about it—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati paṇḍitacodako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such people are called learned accusers.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṁ ahampi jānāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I too know the truth—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso vuccati paṇḍitacodako;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Such people are called learned accusers.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññañca tāhaṁ pucchāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">And may I ask you something else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Codanā kinti vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is meant by accusing?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavipattiyā codeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘One accuses because of failure in morality, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho ācāradiṭṭhiyā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And for failure in conduct and view; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ājīvenapi codeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Also one accuses for failure in livelihood—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">codanā tena vuccatīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of this it is called accusing.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparaṁ gāthāsaṅgaṇikaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Another collection of verses is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
