<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1 Ādimajjhantapucchana - 1. Questions on the beginning, the middle, and the end </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr8_root-pli-ms.j. 1 Ādimajjhantapucchana - 1. Questions on the beginning, the middle, and the end </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uposathakammassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the observance-day procedure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavāraṇākammassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the invitation procedure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tajjanīyakammassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of a legal procedure of condemnation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niyassakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of a legal procedure of demotion? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pabbājanīyakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of a legal procedure of banishment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭisāraṇīyakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of a legal procedure of reconciliation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkhepanīyakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of a legal procedure of ejection? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parivāsadānassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of giving probation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mūlāyapaṭikassanāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of sending back to the beginning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mānattadānassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of giving the trial period? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abbhānassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of rehabilitation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampadākammassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of an ordination procedure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tajjanīyakammassa paṭippassaddhiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the lifting of a legal procedure of condemnation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niyassakammassa paṭippassaddhiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the lifting of a legal procedure of demotion? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pabbājanīyakammassa paṭippassaddhiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the lifting of a legal procedure of banishment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭisāraṇīyakammassa paṭippassaddhiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the lifting of a legal procedure of reconciliation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhepanīyakammassa paṭippassaddhiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the lifting of a legal procedure of ejection? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sativinayassa ko ādi, kiṁ majje, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of resolution through recollection? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amūḷhavinayassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of resolution because of past insanity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassapāpiyasikāya ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of a further penalty? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiṇavatthārakassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of covering over as if with grass? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunovādakasammutiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of appointing an instructor of the nuns? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ticīvarena avippavāsasammutiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the permission to stay apart from one’s three robes? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santhatasammutiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of a blanket-permission? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiyachaḍḍakasammutiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of appointing a money discarder? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāṭiyaggāhāpakasammutiyo ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of appointing a distributor of rainy-season bathing cloths? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattaggāhāpakasammutiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of appointing a distributor of almsbowls? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daṇḍasammutiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the permission to use a staff? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkāsammutiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the permission to use a carrying-net? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daṇḍasikkāsammutiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the permission to use a staff and a carrying-net? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2 Ādimajjhantavissajjanā</span></p>
<p class="p3">2. Replies on the beginning, the middle, and the end </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uposathakammassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the observance-day procedure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uposathakammassa sāmaggī ādi, kiriyā majjhe, niṭṭhānaṁ pariyosānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A complete assembly is the beginning of an observance-day procedure, carrying it out is the middle, and concluding it is the end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavāraṇākammassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the invitation procedure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavāraṇākammassa sāmaggī ādi, kiriyā majjhe, niṭṭhānaṁ pariyosānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A complete assembly is the beginning of an invitation procedure, carrying it out is the middle, and concluding it is the end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tajjanīyakammassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of a legal procedure of condemnation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tajjanīyakammassa vatthu ca puggalo ca ādi, ñatti majjhe, kammavācā pariyosānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The action that is the basis for the offense and the person who has done it are the beginning of a procedure of condemnation, the motion is the middle, and the announcement is the end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niyassakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a legal procedure of demotion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pabbājanīyakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a legal procedure of banishment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭisāraṇīyakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a legal procedure of reconciliation … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkhepanīyakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a legal procedure of ejection … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parivāsadānassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of giving probation … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mūlāyapaṭikassanāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of sending back to the beginning … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mānattadānassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of giving the trial period … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abbhānassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of rehabilitation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abbhānassa vatthu ca puggalo ca ādi, ñatti majjhe, kammavācā pariyosānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The action that is the basis for the offense and the person who has done it are the beginning of rehabilitation, the motion is the middle, and the announcement is the end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampadākammassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of an ordination procedure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampadākammassa puggalo ādi, ñatti majjhe, kammavācā pariyosānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The person is the beginning of the ordination procedure, the motion is the middle, and the announcement is the end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tajjanīyakammassa paṭippassaddhiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the lifting of a legal procedure of condemnation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tajjanīyakammassa paṭippassaddhiyā sammāvattanā ādi, ñatti majjhe, kammavācā pariyosānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Proper conduct is the beginning of the lifting of a legal procedure of condemnation, the motion is the middle, and the announcement is the end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niyassakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a legal procedure of demotion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pabbājanīyakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a legal procedure of banishment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭisāraṇīyakammassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a legal procedure of reconciliation … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkhepanīyakammassa paṭippassaddhiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the lifting of a legal procedure of ejection? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhepanīyakammassa paṭippassaddhiyā sammāvattanā ādi, ñatti majjhe, kammavācā pariyosānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Proper conduct is the beginning of the lifting of a legal procedure of ejection, the motion is the middle, and the announcement is the end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sativinayassa ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of resolution through recollection? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sativinayassa vatthu ca puggalo ca ādi, ñatti majjhe, kammavācā pariyosānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The action that is the basis for the offense and the person who has done it are the beginning of resolution through recollection, the motion is the middle, and the announcement is the end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amūḷhavinayassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of resolution because of past insanity … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassapāpiyasikāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a further penalty … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇavatthārakassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a covering over as if with grass … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunovādakasammutiyā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of appointing an instructor of the nuns … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ticīvarena avippavāsasammutiyā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of the permission to stay apart from one’s three robes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santhatasammutiyā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of a blanket-permission … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpiyachaḍḍakasammutiyā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of appointing a money discarder … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāṭiyaggāhāpakasammutiyā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of appointing a distributor of rainy-season bathing cloths … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pattaggāhāpakasammutiyā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of appointing a distributor of bowls … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daṇḍasammutiyā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of the permission to use a staff … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkāsammutiyā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… of the permission to use a carrying-net … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">daṇḍasikkāsammutiyā ko ādi, kiṁ majjhe, kiṁ pariyosānanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the beginning, the middle, and the end of the permission to use a staff and a carrying-net? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daṇḍasikkāsammutiyā vatthu ca puggalo ca ādi, ñatti majjhe, kammavācā pariyosānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The action that is the basis for the offense and the person who has done it are the beginning of the permission to use a staff and a carrying-net, the motion is the middle, and the announcement is the end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uposathādipucchāvissajjanā niṭṭhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The questions and replies regarding the observance day, etc., are finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
