<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Paṭhamabhāga - Part one </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr2.3_root-pli-ms.j. Paṭhamabhāga - Part one </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">3. Vipattivāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">3. The section on failure </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassutāya bhikkhuniyā avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyantiyā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses for a lustful nun consenting to a lustful man making physical contact with her, to how many of the four kinds of failure do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassutāya bhikkhuniyā avassutassa purisapuggalassa kāyasaṁsaggaṁ sādiyantiyā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ dve vipattiyo bhajanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They belong to two kinds of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sīlavipattiṁ, siyā ācāravipattiṁ …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be failure in morality; they may be failure in conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjantiyā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses for asking for curd and then eating it, to how many of the four kinds of failure do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjantiyā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ ekaṁ vipattiṁ bhajanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They belong to one kind of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ācāravipattiṁ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">failure in conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vipattivāro niṭṭhito tatiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third section on failure is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
