<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.013-13. Saṃyojanasutta  - 13. Fetters </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.013. 13. Saṃyojanasutta  - 13. Fetters </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nāthavagga  - 2. A Protector </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasayimāni, bhikkhave, saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are ten fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni, pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The five lower fetters and the five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five lower fetters? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkāyadiṭṭhi, vicikicchā, sīlabbataparāmāso, kāmacchando, byāpādo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Identity view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, sensual desire, and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni pañcorambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five higher fetters? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūparāgo, arūparāgo, māno, uddhaccaṃ, avijjā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṃyojanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five higher fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dasa saṃyojanānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten fetters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
