<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.074-74. Vaḍḍhisutta  - 74. Growth </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.074. 74. Vaḍḍhisutta  - 74. Growth </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Ākaṅkhavagga  - 8. If You Want </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasahi, bhikkhave, vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhamāno ariyasāvako ariyāya vaḍḍhiyā vaḍḍhati, sārādāyī ca hoti varādāyī kāyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a noble disciple who grows in ten ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettavatthūhi vaḍḍhati, dhanadhaññena vaḍḍhati, puttadārehi vaḍḍhati, dāsakammakaraporisehi vaḍḍhati, catuppadehi vaḍḍhati, saddhāya vaḍḍhati, sīlena vaḍḍhati, sutena vaḍḍhati, cāgena vaḍḍhati, paññāya vaḍḍhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He grows in fields and lands, money and grain, wives and children, in bondservants, workers, and staff, and in livestock. And he grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhamāno ariyasāvako ariyāya vaḍḍhiyā vaḍḍhati, sārādāyī ca hoti varādāyī kāyassāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple who grows in ten ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhanena dhaññena ca yodha vaḍḍhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who grows in money and grain, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puttehi dārehi catuppadehi ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in wives, children, and livestock, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa bhogavā hoti yasassi pūjito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is wealthy, famous, and respected </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātīhi mittehi athopi rājubhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by relatives and friends, and even by royals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhāya sīlena ca yodha vaḍḍhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone grows in faith and ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññāya cāgena sutena cūbhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wisdom, and both generosity and learning—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tādiso sappuriso vicakkhaṇo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a good man such as he sees clearly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭheva dhamme ubhayena vaḍḍhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and in the present life he grows in both ways.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
