<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.106-106. Nijjarasutta  - 106. Wearing Away </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.106. 106. Nijjarasutta  - 106. Wearing Away </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Samaṇasaññāvagga  - 11. Perceptions for Ascetics </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasayimāni, bhikkhave, nijjaravatthūni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these ten grounds for wearing away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, micchādiṭṭhi nijjiṇṇā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right view, wrong view is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsaṅkappassa, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo nijjiṇṇo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right thought, wrong thought is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāsaṅkappapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong thought are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsaṅkappapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right thought, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāvācassa, bhikkhave, micchāvācā nijjiṇṇā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right speech, wrong speech is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāvācāpaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong speech are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācāpaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right speech, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammākammantassa, bhikkhave, micchākammanto nijjiṇṇo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right action, wrong action is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchākammantapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong action are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammantapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right action, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāājīvassa, bhikkhave, micchāājīvo nijjiṇṇo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāājīvapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong livelihood are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right livelihood, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāvāyāmassa, bhikkhave, micchāvāyāmo nijjiṇṇo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right effort, wrong effort is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāvāyāmapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong effort are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right effort, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsatissa, bhikkhave, micchāsati nijjiṇṇā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāsatipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong mindfulness are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsatipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right mindfulness, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsamādhissa, bhikkhave, micchāsamādhi nijjiṇṇo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāsamādhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong immersion are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right immersion, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāñāṇissa, bhikkhave, micchāñāṇaṃ nijjiṇṇaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāñāṇapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong knowledge are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāñāṇapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right knowledge, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāvimuttissa, bhikkhave, micchāvimutti nijjiṇṇā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dasa nijjaravatthūnī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten grounds for wearing away.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
