<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.110-110. Niddhamanīyasutta  - 110. Blown Away </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.110. 110. Niddhamanīyasutta  - 110. Blown Away </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Samaṇasaññāvagga  - 11. Perceptions for Ascetics </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasayime, bhikkhave, niddhamanīyā dhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these ten qualities should be blown away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, micchādiṭṭhi niddhantā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right view, wrong view is blown away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa niddhantā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are blown away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsaṅkappassa, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo niddhanto hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right thought, wrong thought is blown away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācassa bhikkhave, micchāvācā niddhantā hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right speech, wrong speech is blown away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammantassa, bhikkhave, micchākammanto niddhanto hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right action, wrong action is blown away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvassa, bhikkhave, micchāājīvo niddhanto hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is blown away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmassa, bhikkhave, micchāvāyāmo niddhanto hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right effort, wrong effort is blown away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsatissa, bhikkhave, micchāsati niddhantā hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is blown away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhissa, bhikkhave, micchāsamādhi niddhanto hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is blown away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāñāṇissa, bhikkhave, micchāñāṇaṃ niddhantaṃ hoti …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is blown away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāvimuttissa, bhikkhave, micchāvimutti niddhantā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is blown away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa niddhantā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are blown away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa niddhamanīyā dhammā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten qualities that should be blown away.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
