<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.059-59. Pabbajjāsutta  - 59. Going Forth </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.059. 59. Pabbajjāsutta  - 59. Going Forth </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sacittavagga  - 6. Your Own Mind </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yathāpabbajjāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, na cuppannā pāpakā akusalā dhammā cittaṃ pariyādāya ṭhassanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Our minds will be consolidated as they were when we went forth, and arisen bad unskillful qualities will not occupy our minds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aniccasaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, anattasaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, asubhasaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, ādīnavasaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, lokassa samañca visamañca ñatvā taṃsaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, lokassa bhavañca vibhavañca ñatvā taṃsaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, lokassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca ñatvā taṃsaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, pahānasaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, virāgasaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissati, nirodhasaññāparicitañca no cittaṃ bhavissatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of impermanence, not-self, ugliness, and drawbacks. Knowing what is just and unjust in the world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Knowing about continued existence and ending of existence in the world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Knowing the origination and ending of the world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of giving up, fading away, and cessation.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno yathāpabbajjāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti na cuppannā pāpakā akusalā dhammā cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhanti, aniccasaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, anattasaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, asubhasaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, ādīnavasaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, lokassa samañca visamañca ñatvā taṃsaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, lokassa bhavañca vibhavañca ñatvā taṃsaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, lokassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca ñatvā taṃsaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, pahānasaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, virāgasaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, nirodhasaññāparicitañca cittaṃ hoti, tassa dvinnaṃ phalānaṃ aññataraṃ phalaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When your minds are consolidated in these ten perceptions, you can expect one of two results: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enlightenment in the present life, or if there’s something left over, non-return.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
