<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.173-173. Tatiyaadhammasutta  - 173. Bad Principles (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.173. 173. Tatiyaadhammasutta  - 173. Bad Principles (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Jāṇussoṇivagga  - 17. With Jāṇussoṇi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know bad results and good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, adhammo, katamo ca dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad results? And what are good results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamo ca anattho, katamo ca attho? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipāto, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Killing living creatures is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṇātipātā veramaṇī dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not killing living creatures is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca pāṇātipātapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by killing living creatures are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṇātipātā veramaṇipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of not killing living creatures are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādānaṃ, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Stealing is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adinnādānā veramaṇī dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not stealing is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmesumicchācāro, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sexual misconduct is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇī dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding sexual misconduct is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādo, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Lying is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādā veramaṇī dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not lying is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pisuṇā vācā, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Divisive speech is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding divisive speech is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pharusā vācā, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Harsh speech is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding harsh speech is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samphappalāpo, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Talking nonsense is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samphappalāpā veramaṇī dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding talking nonsense is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhijjhā, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Covetousness is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anabhijjhā dhammo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contentment is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">byāpādo, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ill will is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abyāpādo dhammo …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good will is a good principle. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhi, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You should know bad principles and good principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know bad results and good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabban’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
