<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.113-113. Paṭhamaadhammasutta  - 113. Bad Principles (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.113. 113. Paṭhamaadhammasutta  - 113. Bad Principles (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Paccorohaṇivagga  - 12. The Ceremony of Descent </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo anattho ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should know bad principles with bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammo ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā anatthañca, dhammañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, adhammo ca anattho ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are bad principles with bad results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhi, micchāsaṅkappo, micchāvācā, micchākammanto, micchāājīvo, micchāvāyāmo, micchāsati, micchāsamādhi, micchāñāṇaṃ, micchāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, adhammo ca anattho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called bad principles with bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, dhammo ca attho ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are good principles with good results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhi, sammāsaṅkappo, sammāvācā, sammākammanto, sammāājīvo, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati, sammāsamādhi, sammāñāṇaṃ, sammāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhammo ca attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo anattho ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You should know bad principles with bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammo ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā anatthañca, dhammañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabban’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
