<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.114-114. Dutiyaadhammasutta  - 114. Bad Principles (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.114. 114. Dutiyaadhammasutta  - 114. Bad Principles (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Paccorohaṇivagga  - 12. The Ceremony of Descent </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know bad results and good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, adhammo, katamo ca dhammo, katamo ca anattho, katamo ca attho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad results? And what are good results? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhi, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāsaṅkappo, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong thought is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsaṅkappo dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right thought is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāsaṅkappapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong thought are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsaṅkappapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right thought are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāvācā, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong speech is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācā dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right speech is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāvācāpaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong speech are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācāpaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right speech are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchākammanto, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong action is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammanto dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right action is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchākammantapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong action are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammantapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right action are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāājīvo, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong livelihood is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvo dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right livelihood is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāājīvapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong livelihood are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right livelihood are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāvāyāmo, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong effort is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmo dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right effort is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāvāyāmapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong effort are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right effort are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāsati, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong mindfulness is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsati dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right mindfulness is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāsatipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong mindfulness are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsatipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right mindfulness are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāsamādhi, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong immersion is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhi dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right immersion is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāsamādhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong immersion are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right immersion are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāñāṇaṃ, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong knowledge is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāñāṇaṃ dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right knowledge is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāñāṇapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong knowledge are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāñāṇapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right knowledge are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāvimutti, bhikkhave, adhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong freedom is a bad principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvimutti dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right freedom is a good principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṃ anattho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are bad results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti, ayaṃ attho. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right freedom are good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You should know bad principles and good principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you should know bad results and good results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabban’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
