<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.101-101. Samaṇasaññāsutta  - 101. Perceptions for Ascetics </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.101. 101. Samaṇasaññāsutta  - 101. Perceptions for Ascetics </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Samaṇasaññāvagga  - 11. Perceptions for Ascetics </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, samaṇasaññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta dhamme paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when these three perceptions for ascetics are developed and cultivated they fulfill seven things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vevaṇṇiyamhi ajjhupagato, parapaṭibaddhā me jīvikā, añño me ākappo karaṇīyoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I have secured freedom from class.’ ‘My livelihood is tied up with others.’ ‘My behavior should be different.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso samaṇasaññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta dhamme paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When these three perceptions for ascetics are developed and cultivated they fulfill seven things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santatakārī hoti santatavutti sīlesu, anabhijjhālu hoti, abyāpajjo hoti, anatimānī hoti, sikkhākāmo hoti, “idamatthan”tissa hoti jīvitaparikkhāresu, āraddhavīriyo ca viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their deeds and behavior are always consistent with the precepts. They’re content, kind-hearted, and humble. They want to train. They use the necessities of life after reflecting on their purpose. They’re energetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso samaṇasaññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā ime satta dhamme paripūrentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When those three perceptions for ascetics are developed and cultivated they fulfill these seven things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
