<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.199-210-199–210. Nasevitabbādisutta  - 199–210. Should Not Associate, Etc. </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.199-210. 199–210. Nasevitabbādisutta  - 199–210. Should Not Associate, Etc. </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Aparapuggalavagga  - 20. Another Chapter on Persons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato puggalo na sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should not associate with a person who has ten qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātī hoti, adinnādāyī hoti, kāmesumicchācārī hoti, musāvādī hoti, pisuṇavāco hoti, pharusavāco hoti, samphappalāpī hoti, abhijjhālu hoti, byāpannacitto hoti, micchādiṭṭhiko hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They kill living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato puggalo na sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should not associate with a person who has these ten qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato puggalo sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should associate with a person who has ten qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti, musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti, anabhijjhālu hoti, abyāpannacitto hoti, sammādiṭṭhiko hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They’re contented, kind-hearted, with right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato puggalo sevitabbo. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should associate with a person who has these ten qualities.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato puggalo na bhajitabbo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should not frequent a person who has ten qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhajitabbo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should frequent … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na payirupāsitabbo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should not pay homage … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">payirupāsitabbo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should pay homage … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na pujjo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should not venerate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pujjo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should venerate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na pāsaṃso hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should not praise … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāsaṃso hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should praise … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">agāravo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should not revere … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāravo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should revere … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appatisso hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should not defer to … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappatisso hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should defer to … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ārādhako hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">is not a success … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārādhako hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">is a success … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na visujjhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">is not pure … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">visujjhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">is pure … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mānaṃ nādhibhoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">does not win over conceit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mānaṃ adhibhoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">wins over conceit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāya na vaḍḍhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">does not grow in wisdom … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāya vaḍḍhati … pe …. (2–11.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">grows in wisdom … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato puggalo bahuṃ apuññaṃ pasavati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who has these ten qualities makes much bad karma. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahuṃ puññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">makes much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti, musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti, anabhijjhālu hoti, abyāpannacitto hoti, sammādiṭṭhiko hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They’re contented, kind-hearted, with right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato puggalo bahuṃ puññaṃ pasavatī”ti. (12) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who has these ten qualities makes much merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparapuggalavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catuttho paṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
