<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.175-175. Parikkamanasutta  - 175. The Bypass </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.175. 175. Parikkamanasutta  - 175. The Bypass </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Jāṇussoṇivagga  - 17. With Jāṇussoṇi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saparikkamano ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammo, nāyaṃ dhammo aparikkamano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this teaching provides a bypass, it doesn’t lack a bypass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, saparikkamano ayaṃ dhammo, nāyaṃ dhammo aparikkamano? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does this teaching provide a bypass, not lacking a bypass? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātissa, bhikkhave, pāṇātipātā veramaṇī parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not killing living creatures bypasses killing living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādāyissa, bhikkhave, adinnādānā veramaṇī parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not stealing bypasses stealing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmesumicchācārissa, bhikkhave, kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇī parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding sexual misconduct bypasses sexual misconduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādissa, bhikkhave, musāvādā veramaṇī parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not lying bypasses lying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pisuṇavācassa, bhikkhave, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding divisive speech bypasses divisive speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusavācassa, bhikkhave, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding harsh speech bypasses harsh speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samphappalāpissa, bhikkhave, samphappalāpā veramaṇī parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding talking nonsense bypasses talking nonsense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhijjhālussa, bhikkhave, anabhijjhā parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contentment bypasses covetousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpannacittassa, bhikkhave, abyāpādo parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good will bypasses ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhissa, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi parikkamanaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view bypasses wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, saparikkamano ayaṃ dhammo, nāyaṃ dhammo aparikkamano”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how this teaching provides a bypass, it doesn’t lack a bypass.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
