<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.001-1. Kimatthiyasutta  - 1. What’s the Purpose? </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.001. 1. Kimatthiyasutta  - 1. What’s the Purpose? </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ānisaṃsavagga  - 1. Benefits </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kimatthiyāni, bhante, kusalāni sīlāni kimānisaṃsānī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Avippaṭisāratthāni kho, ānanda, kusalāni sīlāni avippaṭisārānisaṃsānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, having no regrets is the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Avippaṭisāro pana, bhante, kimatthiyo kimānisaṃso”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose and benefit of having no regrets?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Avippaṭisāro kho, ānanda, pāmojjattho pāmojjānisaṃso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Joy is the purpose and benefit of having no regrets.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pāmojjaṃ pana, bhante, kimatthiyaṃ kimānisaṃsan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose and benefit of joy?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pāmojjaṃ kho, ānanda, pītatthaṃ pītānisaṃsan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rapture …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pīti pana, bhante, kimatthiyā kimānisaṃsā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose and benefit of rapture?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pīti kho, ānanda, passaddhatthā passaddhānisaṃsā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Tranquility …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Passaddhi pana, bhante, kimatthiyā kimānisaṃsā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose and benefit of tranquility?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Passaddhi kho, ānanda, sukhatthā sukhānisaṃsā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bliss …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sukhaṃ pana, bhante, kimatthiyaṃ kimānisaṃsan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose and benefit of bliss?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sukhaṃ kho, ānanda, samādhatthaṃ samādhānisaṃsan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Immersion …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Samādhi pana, bhante, kimatthiyo kimānisaṃso”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose and benefit of immersion?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Samādhi kho, ānanda, yathābhūtañāṇadassanattho yathābhūtañāṇadassanānisaṃso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Truly knowing and seeing …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ pana, bhante, kimatthiyaṃ kimānisaṃsan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ kho, ānanda, nibbidāvirāgatthaṃ nibbidāvirāgānisaṃsan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Disillusionment and dispassion …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nibbidāvirāgo pana, bhante, kimatthiyo kimānisaṃso”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what’s the purpose and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nibbidāvirāgo kho, ānanda, vimuttiñāṇadassanattho vimuttiñāṇadassanānisaṃso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, ānanda, kusalāni sīlāni avippaṭisāratthāni avippaṭisārānisaṃsāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics is not having regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avippaṭisāro pāmojjattho pāmojjānisaṃso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Joy is the purpose and benefit of not having regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāmojjaṃ pītatthaṃ pītānisaṃsaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rapture is the purpose and benefit of joy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pīti passaddhatthā passaddhānisaṃsā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tranquility is the purpose and benefit of rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passaddhi sukhatthā sukhānisaṃsā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bliss is the purpose and benefit of tranquility. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhaṃ samādhatthaṃ samādhānisaṃsaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Immersion is the purpose and benefit of bliss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhi yathābhūtañāṇadassanattho yathābhūtañāṇadassanānisaṃso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Truly knowing and seeing is the purpose and benefit of immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ nibbidāvirāgatthaṃ nibbidāvirāgānisaṃsaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Disillusionment and dispassion is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbidāvirāgo vimuttiñāṇadassanattho vimuttiñāṇadassanānisaṃso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, ānanda, kusalāni sīlāni anupubbena aggāya parentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, Ānanda, skillful ethics progressively lead up to the highest.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
