<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.088-88. Akkosakasutta  - 88. An Abuser </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.088. 88. Akkosakasutta  - 88. An Abuser </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Theravagga  - 9. Senior Mendicants </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu akkosakaparibhāsako ariyūpavādī sabrahmacārīnaṃ ṭhānametaṃ avakāso yaṃ so dasannaṃ byasanānaṃ aññataraṃ byasanaṃ nigaccheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, any mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual companions, speaking ill of the noble ones, will, without a doubt, fall into one or other of these ten disasters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ dasannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhigataṃ nādhigacchati, adhigatā parihāyati, saddhammassa na vodāyanti, saddhammesu vā adhimāniko hoti anabhirato vā brahmacariyaṃ carati, aññataraṃ vā saṃkiliṭṭhaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjati, gāḷhaṃ vā rogātaṅkaṃ phusati, ummādaṃ vā pāpuṇāti cittakkhepaṃ, sammūḷho kālaṃ karoti, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t achieve the unachieved. What they have achieved falls away. They don’t refine their good qualities. They overestimate their good qualities, or live the spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit a corrupt offense, or contract a severe illness, or go mad and lose their mind. They feel lost when they die. And when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu akkosakaparibhāsako ariyūpavādī sabrahmacārīnaṃ, ṭhānametaṃ avakāso yaṃ so imesaṃ dasannaṃ byasanānaṃ aññataraṃ byasanaṃ nigaccheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual companions, speaking ill of the noble ones, will, without a doubt, fall into one or other of these ten disasters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
