<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.026-26. Kāḷīsutta  - 26. With Kāḷī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.026. 26. Kāḷīsutta  - 26. With Kāḷī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Mahāvagga  - 3. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā mahākaccāno avantīsu viharati kuraraghare pavatte pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land of the Avantis near Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kāḷī upāsikā kuraragharikā yenāyasmā mahākaccāno tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ mahākaccānaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho kāḷī upāsikā kuraragharikā āyasmantaṃ mahākaccānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the laywoman Kāḷī of Kurughara went up to Venerable Mahākaccāna, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vuttamidaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā kumāripañhesu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, this was said by the Buddha in ‘The Maidens’ Questions’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Atthassa pattiṃ hadayassa santiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve reached the goal, peace of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jetvāna senaṃ piyasātarūpaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having conquered the army of the likable and pleasant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekohaṃ jhāyaṃ sukhamanubodhiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">alone, practicing absorption, I awakened to bliss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā janena na karomi sakkhiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I don’t get too close to people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkhī na sampajjati kenaci me’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and no-one gets too close to me.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, bhante, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa kathaṃ vitthārena attho daṭṭhabbo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How should we see the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pathavīkasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā ‘attho’ti abhinibbattesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sister, some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the meditation on universal earth to be the ultimate. Thinking ‘this is the goal’, they are reborn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā kho, bhagini, pathavīkasiṇasamāpattiparamatā, tadabhiññāsi bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha directly knew the extent to which the attainment of the meditation on universal earth was the ultimate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadabhiññāya bhagavā assādamaddasa ādīnavamaddasa nissaraṇamaddasa maggāmaggañāṇadassanamaddasa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Directly knowing this he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the escape. And he saw the knowledge and vision of the variety of paths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa assādadassanahetu ādīnavadassanahetu nissaraṇadassanahetu maggāmaggañāṇadassanahetu atthassa patti hadayassa santi viditā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of the variety of paths, he knew that he had reached the goal, peace of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpokasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the meditation on universal water to be the ultimate. Thinking ‘this is the goal’, they are reborn. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tejokasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the meditation on universal fire … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāyokasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini … </span></p>
<p class="p3">universal air … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nīlakasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini … </span></p>
<p class="p3">universal blue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītakasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini … </span></p>
<p class="p3">universal yellow … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lohitakasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini … </span></p>
<p class="p3">universal red … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">odātakasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini … </span></p>
<p class="p3">universal white … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ākāsakasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini … </span></p>
<p class="p3">universal space … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇakasiṇasamāpattiparamā kho, bhagini, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā ‘attho’ti abhinibbattesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">universal consciousness to be the ultimate. Thinking ‘this is the goal’, they are reborn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā kho, bhagini, viññāṇakasiṇasamāpattiparamatā, tadabhiññāsi bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha directly knew the extent to which the attainment of the meditation on universal consciousness was the ultimate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadabhiññāya bhagavā assādamaddasa … ādīnavamaddasa … nissaraṇamaddasa … maggāmaggañāṇadassanamaddasa … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Directly knowing this he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the escape. And he saw the knowledge and vision of the variety of paths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa assādadassanahetu ādīnavadassanahetu nissaraṇadassanahetu maggāmaggañāṇadassanahetu atthassa patti hadayassa santi viditā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of the variety of paths, he knew that he had reached the goal, peace of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhagini, yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā kumāripañhesu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, sister, that’s how to understand the detailed meaning of what the Buddha said in brief in ‘The Maiden’s Questions’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Atthassa pattiṃ hadayassa santiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve reached the goal, peace of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jetvāna senaṃ piyasātarūpaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having conquered the army of the likable and pleasant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekohaṃ jhāyaṃ sukhamanubodhiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">alone, practicing absorption, I awakened to bliss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā janena na karomi sakkhiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I don’t get too close to people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkhī na sampajjati kenaci me’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and no-one gets too close to me.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa kho, bhagini, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṃ vitthārena attho daṭṭhabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
