<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.033-33. Ubbāhikāsutta  - 33. A Judge </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.033. 33. Ubbāhikāsutta  - 33. A Judge </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Upālivagga  - 4. With Upāli </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katihi nu kho, bhante, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu ubbāhikāya sammannitabbo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to be agreed on as a judge?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasahi kho, upāli, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu ubbāhikāya sammannitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to be agreed on as a judge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhupāli, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti; pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhayāni kho panassa pātimokkhāni vitthārena svāgatāni honti suvibhattāni suppavattīni suvinicchitāni suttaso anubyañjanaso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well judged in both the rules and accompanying material. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vinaye kho pana ṭhito hoti asaṃhīro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re firm and unfaltering in the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibalo hoti ubho atthapaccatthike saññāpetuṃ paññāpetuṃ nijjhāpetuṃ pekkhetuṃ pasādetuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are opposing parties, they’re able to persuade, advocate, and convince them, make them see the other side and trust each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhikaraṇasamuppādavūpasamakusalo hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re skilled in raising and settling disciplinary issues. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhikaraṇaṃ jānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know what a disciplinary issue is. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhikaraṇasamudayaṃ jānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know how a disciplinary issue originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhikaraṇanirodhaṃ jānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know how a disciplinary issue ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhikaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ jānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know the practical way leading to the cessation of a disciplinary issue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, upāli, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu ubbāhikāya sammannitabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant should have these ten qualities to be agreed on as a judge.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
