<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.131-131. Navamasutta  - 131. Ninth </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.131. 131. Navamasutta  - 131. Ninth </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Parisuddhavagga  - 13. Purified </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasayime, bhikkhave, dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā ekantanibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattanti, nāññatra sugatavinayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these ten things when developed and cultivated don’t lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment apart from the Holy One’s training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā ekantanibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattanti, nāññatra sugatavinayā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten things that when developed and cultivated don’t lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment apart from the Holy One’s training.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
