<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.022-22. Adhivuttipadasutta  - 22. Hypotheses </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.022. 22. Adhivuttipadasutta  - 22. Hypotheses </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Mahāvagga  - 3. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, ānanda, dhammā tesaṃ tesaṃ adhivuttipadānaṃ abhiññā sacchikiriyāya saṃvattanti, visārado ahaṃ, ānanda, tattha paṭijānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, I claim to be assured regarding the teachings that lead to realizing by insight the various different hypotheses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tesaṃ tesaṃ tathā tathā dhammaṃ desetuṃ yathā yathā paṭipanno santaṃ vā atthīti ñassati, asantaṃ vā natthīti ñassati, hīnaṃ vā hīnanti ñassati, paṇītaṃ vā paṇītanti ñassati, sauttaraṃ vā sauttaranti ñassati, anuttaraṃ vā anuttaranti ñassati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I am able to teach the Dhamma in appropriate ways to different people. Practicing accordingly, when something exists they’ll know it exists. When it doesn’t exist they’ll know it doesn’t exist. When something is inferior they’ll know it’s inferior. When it’s superior they’ll know it’s superior. When something is not supreme they’ll know it’s not supreme. When it is supreme they’ll know it’s supreme. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā yathā vā pana taṃ ñāteyyaṃ vā daṭṭheyyaṃ vā sacchikareyyaṃ vā tathā tathā ñassati vā dakkhati vā sacchikarissati vā’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they will know or see or realize it in whatever way it should be known or seen or realized. This is possible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadānuttariyaṃ, ānanda, ñāṇānaṃ yadidaṃ tattha tattha yathābhūtañāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But this is the unsurpassable knowledge, that is: truly knowing each and every case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etasmā cāhaṃ, ānanda, ñāṇā aññaṃ ñāṇaṃ uttaritaraṃ vā paṇītataraṃ vā natthīti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Ānanda, I say that there is no other knowledge better or finer than this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasayimāni, ānanda, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalāni, yehi balehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One possesses ten powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, tathāgato ṭhānañca ṭhānato aṭṭhānañca aṭṭhānato yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, the Realized One truly understands the possible as possible, and the impossible as impossible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda, tathāgato ṭhānañca ṭhānato aṭṭhānañca aṭṭhānato yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, idampānanda, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti, yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, tathāgato atītānāgatapaccuppannānaṃ kammasamādānānaṃ ṭhānaso hetuso vipākaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of causes and reasons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe …. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, tathāgato sabbatthagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of practice lead. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe …. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, tathāgato anekadhātuṃ nānādhātuṃ lokaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many and diverse elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe …. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, tathāgato sattānaṃ nānādhimuttikataṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse attitudes of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe …. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, tathāgato parasattānaṃ parapuggalānaṃ indriyaparopariyattaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other sentient beings and other individuals after comprehending them with his mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe …. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, tathāgato jhānavimokkhasamādhisamāpattīnaṃ saṅkilesaṃ vodānaṃ vuṭṭhānaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and attainments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe …. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, tathāgato anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo … pe … iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives, with features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe …. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, tathāgato dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena … pe … yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe …. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, tathāgato āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampānanda, tathāgato āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Idampānanda, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti, yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, ānanda, dasa tathāgatassa tathāgatabalāni, yehi balehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavattetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One possesses. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
