<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.155-155. Sevitabbasutta  - 155. You Should Associate </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.155. 155. Sevitabbasutta  - 155. You Should Associate </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Puggalavagga  - 16. Persons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato puggalo na sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should not associate with a person who has ten qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhiko hoti, micchāsaṅkappo hoti, micchāvāco hoti, micchākammanto hoti, micchāājīvo hoti, micchāvāyāmo hoti, micchāsati hoti, micchāsamādhi hoti, micchāñāṇī hoti, micchāvimutti hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato puggalo na sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should not associate with a person who has these ten qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato puggalo sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should associate with a person who has ten qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi dasahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhiko hoti, sammāsaṅkappo hoti, sammāvāco hoti, sammākammanto hoti, sammāājīvo hoti, sammāvāyāmo hoti, sammāsati hoti, sammāsamādhi hoti, sammāñāṇī hoti, sammāvimutti hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato puggalo sevitabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should associate with a person who has these ten qualities.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
