<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.169-169. Saṅgāravasutta  - 169. With Saṅgārava </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.169. 169. Saṅgāravasutta  - 169. With Saṅgārava </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Jāṇussoṇivagga  - 17. With Jāṇussoṇi </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho saṅgāravo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Saṅgārava the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho saṅgāravo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho, bho gotama, orimaṃ tīraṃ, kiṃ pārimaṃ tīran”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, what is the near shore? And what is the far shore?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pāṇātipāto kho, brāhmaṇa, orimaṃ tīraṃ, pāṇātipātā veramaṇī pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Killing living creatures is the near shore, brahmin, and not killing living creatures is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādānaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, orimaṃ tīraṃ, adinnādānā veramaṇī pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Stealing is the near shore, and not stealing is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmesumicchācāro orimaṃ tīraṃ, kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇī pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sexual misconduct is the near shore, and avoiding sexual misconduct is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādo orimaṃ tīraṃ, musāvādā veramaṇī pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Lying is the near shore, and not lying is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pisuṇā vācā orimaṃ tīraṃ, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Divisive speech is the near shore, and avoiding divisive speech is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusā vācā orimaṃ tīraṃ, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Harsh speech is the near shore, and avoiding harsh speech is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samphappalāpo orimaṃ tīraṃ, samphappalāpā veramaṇī pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Talking nonsense is the near shore, and avoiding talking nonsense is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhijjhā orimaṃ tīraṃ, anabhijjhā pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Covetousness is the near shore, and contentment is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpādo orimaṃ tīraṃ, abyāpādo pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ill will is the near shore, and good will is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhi orimaṃ tīraṃ, sammādiṭṭhi pārimaṃ tīraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view is the near shore, and right view is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, orimaṃ tīraṃ, idaṃ pārimaṃ tīranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the near shore, and this is the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appakā te manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Few are those among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye janā pāragāmino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who cross to the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athāyaṃ itarā pajā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The rest just run </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tīramevānudhāvati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">around on the near shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho sammadakkhāte, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the teaching is well explained, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhamme dhammānuvattino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who practice accordingly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te janā pāramessanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">are the ones who will cross over </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maccudheyyaṃ suduttaraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Death’s domain so hard to pass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ vippahāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rid of dark qualities, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukkaṃ bhāvetha paṇḍito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">an astute person should develop the bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Okā anokamāgamma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Leaving home behind </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viveke yattha dūramaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the seclusion so hard to enjoy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrābhiratimiccheyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should try to find delight there, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hitvā kāme akiñcano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">having left behind sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariyodapeyya attānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With no possessions, an astute person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittaklesehi paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ sambodhiyaṅgesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those whose minds are rightly developed </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammā cittaṃ subhāvitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the awakening factors; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādānapaṭinissagge, </span></p>
<p class="p3">letting go of attachments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupādāya ye ratā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they delight in not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavā jutimanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With defilements ended, brilliant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te loke parinibbutā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they are extinguished in this world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
