<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.134-134. Sādhusutta  - 134. Good </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.134. 134. Sādhusutta  - 134. Good </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Sādhuvagga  - 14. Good </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhuñca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi asādhuñca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you what is good and what is not good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamañca, bhikkhave, asādhu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what, mendicants, is not good? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhi, micchāsaṅkappo, micchāvācā, micchākammanto, micchāājīvo, micchāvāyāmo, micchāsati, micchāsamādhi, micchāñāṇaṃ, micchāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, asādhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called what is not good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, sādhu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is good? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhi, sammāsaṅkappo, sammāvācā sammākammanto, sammāājīvo, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati, sammāsamādhi, sammāñāṇaṃ, sammāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sādhū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called what is good.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
