<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.063-63. Niṭṭhaṅgatasutta  - 63. Come to a Conclusion </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.063. 63. Niṭṭhaṅgatasutta  - 63. Come to a Conclusion </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Yamakavagga  - 7. Pairs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye keci, bhikkhave, mayi niṭṭhaṃ gatā sabbe te diṭṭhisampannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, all those who have come to a conclusion about me are accomplished in view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ diṭṭhisampannānaṃ pañcannaṃ idha niṭṭhā, pañcannaṃ idha vihāya niṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of those who are accomplished in view, five conclude their path in this realm, and five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha niṭṭhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which five conclude their path in this realm? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattakkhattuparamassa, kolaṅkolassa, ekabījissa, sakadāgāmissa, yo ca diṭṭheva dhamme arahā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The one who has seven rebirths at most, the one who goes from family to family, the one-seeder, the once returner, and the one who is perfected in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha niṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five conclude their path in this realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha vihāya niṭṭhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antarāparinibbāyissa, upahaccaparinibbāyissa, asaṅkhāraparinibbāyissa, sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyissa, uddhaṃsotassa akaniṭṭhagāmino—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The one who is extinguished between one life and the next, the one who is extinguished upon landing, the one who is extinguished without extra effort, the one who is extinguished with extra effort, and the one who heads upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha vihāya niṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci, bhikkhave, mayi niṭṭhaṃ gatā, sabbe te diṭṭhisampannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All those who have come to a conclusion about me are accomplished in view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ diṭṭhisampannānaṃ imesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha niṭṭhā, imesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha vihāya niṭṭhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of those who are accomplished in view, these five conclude their path in this realm, and these five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
