<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.056-56. Paṭhamasaññāsutta  - 56. Perceptions (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.056. 56. Paṭhamasaññāsutta  - 56. Perceptions (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Sacittavagga  - 6. Your Own Mind </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasayimā, bhikkhave, saññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā honti mahānisaṃsā amatogadhā amatapariyosānā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in the deathless and end with the deathless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asubhasaññā, maraṇasaññā, āhāre paṭikūlasaññā, sabbaloke anabhiratasaññā, aniccasaññā, anicce dukkhasaññā, dukkhe anattasaññā, pahānasaññā, virāgasaññā, nirodhasaññā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, and not-self in suffering, giving up, fading away, and cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, bhikkhave, dasa saññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā honti mahānisaṃsā amatogadhā amatapariyosānā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in the deathless and end with the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
