<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.039-39. Paṭhamaānandasutta  - 39. With Ānanda (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.039. 39. Paṭhamaānandasutta  - 39. With Ānanda (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Upālivagga  - 4. With Upāli </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘saṅghabhedo saṅghabhedo’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘schism in the Saṅgha’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, saṅgho bhinno hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is schism in the Saṅgha defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhānanda, bhikkhū adhammaṃ dhammoti dīpenti, dhammaṃ adhammoti dīpenti, avinayaṃ vinayoti dīpenti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññattaṃ tathāgatena apaññattaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te imehi dasahi vatthūhi avakassanti apakassanti āveni kammāni karonti āveni pātimokkhaṃ uddisanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">On these ten grounds they split off and go their own way. They perform legal acts autonomously and recite the monastic code autonomously. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, ānanda, saṅgho bhinno hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how schism in the Saṅgha is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Samaggaṃ pana, bhante, saṅghaṃ bhinditvā kiṃ so pasavatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what does someone who has caused a schism in a harmonious Saṅgha bring upon themselves?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kappaṭṭhikaṃ, ānanda, kibbisaṃ pasavatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They bring upon themselves evil that lasts for an eon.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana, bhante, kappaṭṭhikaṃ kibbisan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what is the evil that lasts for an eon?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kappaṃ, ānanda, nirayamhi paccatīti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They burn in hell for an eon, Ānanda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpāyiko nerayiko, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A schismatic remains for the eon </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kappaṭṭho saṃghabhedako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in a place of loss, in hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaggarato adhammaṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Basing themselves in what is not the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yogakkhemā padhaṃsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">favoring factions, they destroy their sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃghaṃ samaggaṃ bhinditvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After causing schism in a harmonious Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kappaṃ nirayamhi paccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they burn in hell for an eon.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
