<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.154-154. Sacchikātabbasutta  - 154. Should Be Realized </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.154. 154. Sacchikātabbasutta  - 154. Should Be Realized </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Ariyavagga  - 15. The Noble Path </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sacchikātabbañca vo, bhikkhave, dhammaṃ desessāmi na sacchikātabbañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I will teach you the principle to realize and the principle not to realize. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamo ca, bhikkhave, na sacchikātabbo dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the principle not to realize? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhi … pe … micchāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, na sacchikātabbo dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the principle not to realize. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sacchikātabbo dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the principle to realize? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāvimutti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sacchikātabbo dhammo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the principle to realize.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariyavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyo paṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
