<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.016-16. Āhuneyyasutta  - 16. Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.016. 16. Āhuneyyasutta  - 16. Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Nāthavagga  - 2. A Protector </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasayime, bhikkhave, puggalā āhuneyyā pāhuneyyā dakkhiṇeyyā añjalikaraṇīyā anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these ten people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame dasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What ten? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgato arahaṃ sammāsambuddho, paccekabuddho, ubhatobhāgavimutto, paññāvimutto, kāyasakkhī, diṭṭhippatto, saddhāvimutto, saddhānusārī, dhammānusārī, gotrabhū—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha; a Buddha awakened for themselves; one freed both ways; one freed by wisdom; a personal witness; one attained to view; one freed by faith; a follower by faith; a follower of the teachings; a member of the spiritual family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa puggalā āhuneyyā … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the ten people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
