<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.040-40. Dutiyaānandasutta  - 40. With Ānanda (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.040. 40. Dutiyaānandasutta  - 40. With Ānanda (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Upālivagga  - 4. With Upāli </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Saṅghasāmaggī, saṅghasāmaggī’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘harmony in the Saṅgha’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, saṅgho samaggo hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is harmony in the Saṅgha defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhānanda, bhikkhū adhammaṃ adhammoti dīpenti, dhammaṃ dhammoti dīpenti, avinayaṃ avinayoti dīpenti, vinayaṃ vinayoti dīpenti, abhāsitaṃ alapitaṃ tathāgatena abhāsitaṃ alapitaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, bhāsitaṃ lapitaṃ tathāgatena bhāsitaṃ lapitaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, anāciṇṇaṃ tathāgatena anāciṇṇaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, āciṇṇaṃ tathāgatena āciṇṇaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, apaññattaṃ tathāgatena apaññattaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, paññattaṃ tathāgatena paññattaṃ tathāgatenāti dīpenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as not the teaching, and what is the teaching as the teaching. They explain what is not the training as not the training, and what is the training as the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te imehi dasahi vatthūhi na avakassanti na apakassanti na āveni kammāni karonti na āveni pātimokkhaṃ uddisanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">On these ten grounds they don’t split off and go their own way. They don’t perform legal acts autonomously or recite the monastic code autonomously. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, ānanda, saṅgho samaggo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how harmony in the Saṅgha is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhinnaṃ pana, bhante, saṅghaṃ samaggaṃ katvā kiṃ so pasavatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what does someone who has created harmony in a schismatic Saṅgha bring upon themselves?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Brahmaṃ, ānanda, puññaṃ pasavatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They bring divine merit upon themselves.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana, bhante, brahmaṃ puññan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what is divine merit?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kappaṃ, ānanda, saggamhi modatīti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They rejoice in heaven for an eon, Ānanda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhā saṃghassa sāmaggī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A Saṅgha in harmony is happy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggānañca anuggaho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as is support for those in harmony. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaggarato dhammaṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Basing themselves in the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yogakkhemā na dhaṃsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">favoring harmony, they destroy no sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃghaṃ samaggaṃ katvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After creating harmony in the Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kappaṃ saggamhi modatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they rejoice in heaven for an eon.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upālivaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāli ṭhapanā ubbāho, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampadanissayā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmaṇero ca dve bhedā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ānandehi pare duveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
