<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.064-64. Aveccappasannasutta  - 64. Experiential Confidence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.064. 64. Aveccappasannasutta  - 64. Experiential Confidence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Yamakavagga  - 7. Pairs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye keci, bhikkhave, mayi aveccappasannā, sabbe te sotāpannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, all those who have experiential confidence in me have entered the stream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ sotāpannānaṃ pañcannaṃ idha niṭṭhā, pañcannaṃ idha vihāya niṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of those who have entered the stream, five conclude their path in this realm, and five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha niṭṭhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which five conclude their path in this realm? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattakkhattuparamassa, kolaṅkolassa, ekabījissa, sakadāgāmissa, yo ca diṭṭheva dhamme arahā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The one who has seven rebirths at most, the one who goes from family to family, the one-seeder, the once returner, and the one who is perfected in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha niṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five conclude their path in this realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha vihāya niṭṭhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antarāparinibbāyissa, upahaccaparinibbāyissa, asaṅkhāraparinibbāyissa, sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyissa, uddhaṃsotassa akaniṭṭhagāmino—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The one who is extinguished between one life and the next, the one who is extinguished upon landing, the one who is extinguished without extra effort, the one who is extinguished with extra effort, and the one who heads upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha vihāya niṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci, bhikkhave, mayi aveccappasannā sabbe te sotāpannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All those who have experiential confidence in me have entered the stream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ sotāpannānaṃ imesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha niṭṭhā, imesaṃ pañcannaṃ idha vihāya niṭṭhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of those who have entered the stream, these five conclude their path in this realm, and these five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
