<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.099-99. Upālisutta  - 99. With Upāli </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.099. 99. Upālisutta  - 99. With Upāli </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Upālivagga  - 10. With Upāli </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upāli yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā upāli bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“icchāmahaṃ, bhante, araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I wish to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Durabhisambhavāni hi kho, upāli, araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Upāli, remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest are challenging. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkaraṃ pavivekaṃ durabhiramaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s hard to maintain seclusion and hard to find joy in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatte haranti maññe mano vanāni samādhiṃ alabhamānassa bhikkhuno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Staying alone, the forests seem to rob the mind of a mendicant who isn’t immersed in samādhi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, upāli, evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If someone should say this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ samādhiṃ alabhamāno araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevissāmī’ti, tassetaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Though I don’t have immersion, I’m going to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.’ You can expect that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṃsīdissati vā uplavissati vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll sink down or float away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, upāli, mahāudakarahado. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a large lake, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha āgaccheyya hatthināgo sattaratano vā aḍḍhaṭṭharatano vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and along comes a bull elephant with a height of seven or eight cubits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evamassa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’d think, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yannūnāhaṃ imaṃ udakarahadaṃ ogāhetvā kaṇṇasandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷeyyaṃ piṭṭhisandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷeyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Why don’t I plunge into this lake and play around while washing my ears and back? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaṇṇasandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷitvā piṭṭhisandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷitvā nhatvā ca pivitvā ca paccuttaritvā yena kāmaṃ pakkameyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I’ve bathed and emerged from the water, I’ll come out and go wherever I want.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ udakarahadaṃ ogāhetvā kaṇṇasandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷeyya piṭṭhisandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s just what he does. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṇṇasandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷitvā piṭṭhisandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷitvā nhatvā ca pivitvā ca paccuttaritvā yena kāmaṃ pakkameyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahā, upāli, attabhāvo gambhīre gādhaṃ vindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because his large life-form finds a footing in the depths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha āgaccheyya saso vā biḷāro vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then along comes a rabbit or a cat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evamassa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d think, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ko cāhaṃ, ko ca hatthināgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What difference is there between me and a bull elephant? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ imaṃ udakarahadaṃ ogāhetvā kaṇṇasandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷeyyaṃ piṭṭhisandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷeyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I plunge into this lake and play around while washing my ears and back? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṇṇasandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷitvā piṭṭhisandhovikampi khiḍḍaṃ kīḷitvā nhatvā ca pivitvā ca paccuttaritvā yena kāmaṃ pakkameyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I’ve bathed and drunk, I’ll emerge from the water and go wherever I want.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ udakarahadaṃ sahasā appaṭisaṅkhā pakkhandeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They jump into the lake rashly, without thinking. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassetaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can expect that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṃsīdissati vā uplavissati vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll sink down or float away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paritto, upāli, attabhāvo gambhīre gādhaṃ na vindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because their little life-form finds no footing in the depths. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, upāli, yo evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If someone should say this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ samādhiṃ alabhamāno araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevissāmī’ti, tassetaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Though I don’t have immersion, I’m going to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.’ You can expect that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṃsīdissati vā uplavissati vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll sink down or float away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, upāli, daharo kumāro mando uttānaseyyako sakena muttakarīsena kīḷati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a little baby boy playing in his own urine and feces. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, upāli, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Upāli? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nanvāyaṃ kevalā paripūrā bālakhiḍḍā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t that a totally foolish game?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sa kho so, upāli, kumāro aparena samayena vuddhimanvāya indriyānaṃ paripākamanvāya </span></p>
<p class="p3">“After some time that boy grows up and his faculties mature. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāni kānici kumārakānaṃ kīḷāpanakāni bhavanti, seyyathidaṃ—vaṅkakaṃ ghaṭikaṃ mokkhacikaṃ ciṅgulakaṃ pattāḷhakaṃ rathakaṃ dhanukaṃ, tehi kīḷati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He accordingly plays childish games such as toy plows, tip-cat, somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, and toy bows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, upāli, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Upāli? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nanvāyaṃ khiḍḍā purimāya khiḍḍāya abhikkantatarā ca paṇītatarā cā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Aren’t such games better than what he did before?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sa kho so, upāli, kumāro aparena samayena vuddhimanvāya indriyānaṃ paripākamanvāya </span></p>
<p class="p3">“After some time that boy grows up and his faculties mature further. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcahi kāmaguṇehi samappito samaṅgibhūto paricāreti </span></p>
<p class="p3">He accordingly amuses himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuviññeyyehi rūpehi iṭṭhehi kantehi manāpehi piyarūpehi kāmūpasaṃhitehi rajanīyehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sotaviññeyyehi saddehi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sounds known by the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānaviññeyyehi gandhehi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smells known by the nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāviññeyyehi rasehi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tastes known by the tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaviññeyyehi phoṭṭhabbehi iṭṭhehi kantehi manāpehi piyarūpehi kāmūpasaṃhitehi rajanīyehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, upāli, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Upāli? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nanvāyaṃ khiḍḍā purimāhi khiḍḍāhi abhikkantatarā ca paṇītatarā cā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Aren’t such games better than what he did before?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha kho pana vo, upāli, tathāgato loke uppajjati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But then a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ lokaṃ sadevakaṃ samārakaṃ sabrahmakaṃ sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiṃ pajaṃ sadevamanussaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ dhammaṃ suṇāti gahapati vā gahapatiputto vā aññatarasmiṃ vā kule paccājāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder hears that teaching, or a householder’s child, or someone reborn in some good family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ dhammaṃ sutvā tathāgate saddhaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They gain faith in the Realized One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena saddhāpaṭilābhena samannāgato iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and reflect, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sambādho gharāvāso rajāpatho, abbhokāso pabbajjā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Living in a house is cramped and dirty, but the life of one gone forth is wide open. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nayidaṃ sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṃ ekantaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajeyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So aparena samayena appaṃ vā bhogakkhandhaṃ pahāya mahantaṃ vā bhogakkhandhaṃ pahāya appaṃ vā ñātiparivaṭṭaṃ pahāya mahantaṃ vā ñātiparivaṭṭaṃ pahāya kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pabbajito samāno bhikkhūnaṃ sikkhāsājīvasamāpanno pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti nihitadaṇḍo nihitasattho lajjī dayāpanno sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once they’ve gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādānaṃ pahāya adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti dinnādāyī dinnapāṭikaṅkhī; athenena sucibhūtena attanā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up stealing. They take only what’s given, and expect only what’s given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abrahmacariyaṃ pahāya brahmacārī hoti ārācārī virato methunā gāmadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the common practice of sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādaṃ pahāya musāvādā paṭivirato hoti saccavādī saccasandho theto paccayiko avisaṃvādako lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They’re honest and trustworthy, and don’t trick the world with their words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pisuṇaṃ vācaṃ pahāya pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, ito sutvā na amutra akkhātā imesaṃ bhedāya, amutra vā sutvā na imesaṃ akkhātā amūsaṃ bhedāya. Iti bhinnānaṃ vā sandhātā sahitānaṃ vā anuppadātā, samaggārāmo samaggarato samagganandī; samaggakaraṇiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up divisive speech. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusaṃ vācaṃ pahāya pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti. Yā sā vācā nelā kaṇṇasukhā pemanīyā hadayaṅgamā porī bahujanakantā bahujanamanāpā, tathārūpiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samphappalāpaṃ pahāya samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti kālavādī bhūtavādī atthavādī dhammavādī vinayavādī, nidhānavatiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti kālena sāpadesaṃ pariyantavatiṃ atthasaṃhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bījagāmabhūtagāmasamārambhā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid injuring plants and seeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekabhattiko hoti rattūparato, virato vikālabhojanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naccagītavāditavisūkadassanā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid dancing, singing, music, and seeing shows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mālāgandhavilepanadhāraṇamaṇḍanavibhūsanaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid beautifying and adorning themselves with garlands, perfumes, and makeup. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uccāsayanamahāsayanā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid high and luxurious beds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātarūparajatapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid receiving gold and money, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmakadhaññapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">raw grains, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmakamaṃsapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">raw meat, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthikumārikapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">women and girls, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāsidāsapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">male and female bondservants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajeḷakapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">goats and sheep, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuṭasūkarapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">chickens and pigs, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthigavassavaḷavapaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">elephants, cows, horses, and mares, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khettavatthupaṭiggahaṇā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and fields and land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dūteyyapahiṇagamanānuyogā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They avoid running errands and messages; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kayavikkayā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">buying and selling; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tulākūṭakaṃsakūṭamānakūṭā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">falsifying weights, metals, or measures; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkoṭanavañcananikatisāciyogā paṭivirato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chedanavadhabandhanaviparāmosaālopasahasākārā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So santuṭṭho hoti kāyaparihārikena cīvarena kucchiparihārikena piṇḍapātena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re content with robes to look after the body and alms-food to look after the belly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena yeneva pakkamati samādāyeva pakkamati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi nāma pakkhī sakuṇo yena yeneva ḍeti sapattabhārova ḍeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti kāyaparihārikena cīvarena kucchiparihārikena piṇḍapātena. Yena yeneva pakkamati samādāyeva pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and alms-food to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā ariyena sīlakkhandhena samannāgato ajjhattaṃ anavajjasukhaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they see a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati; rakkhati cakkhundriyaṃ, cakkhundriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear a sound with their ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they smell an odor with their nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they taste a flavor with their tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they feel a touch with their body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they know a thought with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjati; rakkhati manindriyaṃ, manindriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā ariyena indriyasaṃvarena samannāgato ajjhattaṃ abyāsekasukhaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss inside themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So abhikkante paṭikkante sampajānakārī hoti, ālokite vilokite sampajānakārī hoti, samiñjite pasārite sampajānakārī hoti, saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇe sampajānakārī hoti, asite pīte khāyite sāyite sampajānakārī hoti, uccārapassāvakamme sampajānakārī hoti, gate ṭhite nisinne sutte jāgarite bhāsite tuṇhībhāve sampajānakārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā ca ariyena sīlakkhandhena samannāgato, iminā ca ariyena indriyasaṃvarena samannāgato, iminā ca ariyena satisampajaññena samannāgato </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have this noble spectrum of ethics, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivittaṃ senāsanaṃ bhajati araññaṃ rukkhamūlaṃ pabbataṃ kandaraṃ giriguhaṃ susānaṃ vanapatthaṃ abbhokāsaṃ palālapuñjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they frequent a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, they sit down cross-legged, with their body straight, and establish mindfulness right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So abhijjhaṃ loke pahāya vigatābhijjhena cetasā viharati, abhijjhāya cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up desire for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of desire, cleansing the mind of desire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byāpādapadosaṃ pahāya abyāpannacitto viharati sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī, byāpādapadosā cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up ill will and malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of compassion for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thinamiddhaṃ pahāya vigatathinamiddho viharati ālokasaññī sato sampajāno, thinamiddhā cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaccakukkuccaṃ pahāya anuddhato viharati ajjhattaṃ vūpasantacitto, uddhaccakukkuccā cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up restlessness and remorse, they meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicikicchaṃ pahāya tiṇṇavicikiccho viharati akathaṅkathī kusalesu dhammesu, vicikicchāya cittaṃ parisodheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ime pañca nīvaraṇe pahāya cetaso upakkilese paññāya dubbalīkaraṇe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, upāli, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Upāli? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nanvāyaṃ vihāro purimehi vihārehi abhikkantataro ca paṇītataro cā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t this state better than what they had before?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imampi kho, upāli, mama sāvakā attani dhammaṃ sampassamānā araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevanti, no ca kho tāva anuppattasadatthā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they haven’t achieved their own goal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, upāli, bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā … pe … dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, upāli, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Upāli? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nanvāyaṃ vihāro purimehi vihārehi abhikkantataro ca paṇītataro cā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t this state better than what they had before?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imampi kho, upāli, mama sāvakā attani dhammaṃ sampassamānā araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevanti, no ca kho tāva anuppattasadatthā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they haven’t achieved their own goal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, upāli, bhikkhu pītiyā ca virāgā … pe … tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, upāli, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Upāli? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nanvāyaṃ vihāro purimehi vihārehi abhikkantataro ca paṇītataro cā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t this state better than what they had before?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imampi kho, upāli, mama sāvakā attani dhammaṃ sampassamānā araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevanti, no ca kho tāva anuppattasadatthā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they haven’t achieved their own goal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, upāli, bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, upāli, bhikkhu sabbaso rūpasaññānaṃ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānaṃ atthaṅgamā nānattasaññānaṃ amanasikārā ‘ananto ākāso’ti ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Furthermore, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, a mendicant enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, upāli, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Upāli? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nanvāyaṃ vihāro purimehi vihārehi abhikkantataro ca paṇītataro cā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t this state better than what they had before?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imampi kho, upāli, mama sāvakā attani dhammaṃ sampassamānā araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevanti, no ca kho tāva anuppattasadatthā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they haven’t achieved their own goal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, upāli, bhikkhu sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘anantaṃ viññāṇan’ti viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, a mendicant enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘natthi kiñcī’ti ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘santametaṃ paṇītametan’ti nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, upāli, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Upāli? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nanvāyaṃ vihāro purimehi vihārehi abhikkantataro ca paṇītataro cā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t this state better than what they had before?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imampi kho, upāli, mama sāvakā attani dhammaṃ sampassamānā araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevanti, no ca kho tāva anuppattasadatthā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they haven’t achieved their own goal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, upāli, bhikkhu sabbaso nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ upasampajja viharati; paññāya cassa disvā āsavā parikkhīṇā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, upāli, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Upāli? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nanvāyaṃ vihāro purimehi vihārehi abhikkantataro ca paṇītataro cā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t this state better than what they had before?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imampi kho, upāli, mama sāvakā attani dhammaṃ sampassamānā araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevanti, anuppattasadatthā ca viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. And they have achieved their own goal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iṅgha tvaṃ, upāli, saṅghe viharāhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Come on, Upāli, stay with the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe te viharato phāsu bhavissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you stay with the Saṅgha you’ll be comfortable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
