<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.089-89. Kokālikasutta  - 89. With Kokālika </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.089. 89. Kokālikasutta  - 89. With Kokālika </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Theravagga  - 9. Senior Mendicants </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kokāliko bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho kokāliko bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the mendicant Kokālika went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pāpicchā, bhante, sāriputtamoggallānā, pāpikānaṃ icchānaṃ vasaṃ gatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have wicked desires. They’ve fallen under the sway of wicked desires.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, kokālika, mā hevaṃ, kokālika. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t say that, Kokālika! Don’t say that, Kokālika! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasādehi, kokālika, sāriputtamoggallānesu cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Have confidence in Sāriputta and Moggallāna, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pesalā sāriputtamoggallānā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re good monks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho kokāliko bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time Kokālika said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiñcāpi me, bhante, bhagavā saddhāyiko paccayiko, atha kho pāpicchāva sāriputtamoggallānā, pāpikānaṃ icchānaṃ vasaṃ gatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Despite my faith and trust in the Buddha, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have wicked desires. They’ve fallen under the sway of wicked desires.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, kokālika, mā hevaṃ, kokālika. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t say that, Kokālika! Don’t say that, Kokālika! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasādehi, kokālika, sāriputtamoggallānesu cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Have confidence in Sāriputta and Moggallāna, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pesalā sāriputtamoggallānā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re good monks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho kokāliko bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a third time Kokālika said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiñcāpi me, bhante, bhagavā saddhāyiko paccayiko, atha kho pāpicchāva sāriputtamoggallānā, pāpikānaṃ icchānaṃ vasaṃ gatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Despite my faith and trust in the Buddha, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have wicked desires. They’ve fallen under the sway of wicked desires.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, kokālika, mā hevaṃ, kokālika. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t say that, Kokālika! Don’t say that, Kokālika! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasādehi, kokālika, sāriputtamoggallānesu cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Have confidence in Sāriputta and Moggallāna, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pesalā sāriputtamoggallānā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re good monks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kokāliko bhikkhu uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Kokālika got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acirapakkantassa ca kokālikassa bhikkhuno sāsapamattīhi pīḷakāhi sabbo kāyo phuṭo ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not long after he left his body erupted with boils the size of mustard seeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāsapamattiyo hutvā muggamattiyo ahesuṃ, muggamattiyo hutvā kalāyamattiyo ahesuṃ, kalāyamattiyo hutvā kolaṭṭhimattiyo ahesuṃ, kolaṭṭhimattiyo hutvā kolamattiyo ahesuṃ, kolamattiyo hutvā āmalakamattiyo ahesuṃ, āmalakamattiyo hutvā tiṇḍukamattiyo ahesuṃ, tiṇḍukamattiyo hutvā, beḷuvasalāṭukamattiyo ahesuṃ, beḷuvasalāṭukamattiyo hutvā billamattiyo ahesuṃ, billamattiyo hutvā pabhijjiṃsu, pubbañca lohitañca pagghariṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The boils grew to the size of mung beans, then chickpeas, then jujube seeds, then jujubes, then myrobalans, then unripe wood apples, then ripe wood apples. Finally they burst open, and pus and blood oozed out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sudaṃ kadalipattesu seti macchova visagilito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He just laid down on banana leaves like a poisoned fish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho turū paccekabrahmā yena kokāliko bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā vehāse ṭhatvā kokālikaṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Tudu the independent brahmā went to Kokālika, and standing in the sky he said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pasādehi, kokālika, sāriputtamoggallānesu cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kokālika, have confidence in Sāriputta and Moggallāna, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pesalā sāriputtamoggallānā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re good monks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kosi tvaṃ, āvuso”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who are you, reverend?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahaṃ turū paccekabrahmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am Tudu the independent brahmā.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu tvaṃ, āvuso, bhagavatā anāgāmī byākato, atha kiñcarahi idhāgato? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Didn’t the Buddha declare you a non-returner? So what are you doing back here? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passa yāvañca te idaṃ aparaddhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">See how far you have strayed!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho turū paccekabrahmā kokālikaṃ bhikkhuṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Tudu addressed Kokālika in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Purisassa hi jātassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A person is born </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuṭhārī jāyate mukhe; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with an axe in their mouth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāya chindati attānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fool cuts themselves with it </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bālo dubbhāsitaṃ bhaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when they say bad words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo nindiyaṃ pasaṃsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you praise someone worthy of criticism, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā nindati yo pasaṃsiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or criticize someone worthy of praise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicināti mukhena so kaliṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you choose bad luck with your own mouth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalinā tena sukhaṃ na vindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll never find happiness that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamattako ayaṃ kali, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bad luck at dice is a trivial thing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo akkhesu dhanaparājayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if all you lose is your money </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbassāpi sahāpi attanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and all you own, even yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva mahattaro kali; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s really terrible luck </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sugatesu manaṃ padūsaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is to hate the holy ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sataṃ sahassānaṃ nirabbudānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For more than two quinquadecillion years, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattiṃsati pañca ca abbudāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and another five quattuordecillion years, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yamariyagarahī nirayaṃ upeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a slanderer of noble ones goes to hell, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vācaṃ manañca paṇidhāya pāpakan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having aimed bad words and thoughts at them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kokāliko bhikkhu teneva ābādhena kālamakāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the mendicant Kokālika died of that illness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālaṅkato ca kokāliko bhikkhu padumaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati sāriputtamoggallānesu cittaṃ āghātetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He was reborn in the Pink Lotus hell because of his resentment for Sāriputta and Moggallāna. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho brahmā sahampati bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the beautiful Brahmā Sahampati, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kokāliko, bhante, bhikkhu kālaṅkato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the mendicant Kokālika has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālaṅkato ca, bhante, kokāliko bhikkhu padumaṃ nirayaṃ upapanno sāriputtamoggallānesu cittaṃ āghātetvā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He was reborn in the pink lotus hell because of his resentment for Sāriputta and Moggallāna.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca brahmā sahampati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what Brahmā Sahampati said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right side, before vanishing right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassā rattiyā accayena bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṃ, bhikkhave, rattiṃ brahmā sahampati abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho, bhikkhave, brahmā sahampati maṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kokāliko, bhante, bhikkhu kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kālaṅkato ca, bhante, kokāliko bhikkhu padumaṃ nirayaṃ upapanno sāriputtamoggallānesu cittaṃ āghātetvā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca, bhikkhave, brahmā sahampati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvā maṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kīva dīghaṃ nu kho, bhante, padume niraye āyuppamāṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how long is the life span in the Pink Lotus hell?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dīghaṃ kho, bhikkhu, padume niraye āyuppamāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s long, mendicant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na taṃ sukaraṃ saṅkhātuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy to calculate </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakāni vassānīti vā ettakāni vassasatānīti vā ettakāni vassasahassānīti vā ettakāni vassasatasahassānīti vā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how many years, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of years it lasts.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkā pana, bhante, upamaṃ kātun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, is it possible to give a simile?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkā, bhikkhū”ti bhagavā avoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s possible,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsatikhāriko kosalako tilavāho tato puriso vassasatassa vassasatassa accayena ekamekaṃ tilaṃ uddhareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suppose there was a Kosalan cartload of twenty bushels of sesame seed. And at the end of every hundred years someone would remove a single seed from it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khippataraṃ kho so, bhikkhu, vīsatikhāriko kosalako tilavāho iminā upakkamena parikkhayaṃ pariyādānaṃ gaccheyya, na tveva eko abbudo nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By this means the Kosalan cartload of twenty bushels of sesame seed would run out faster than a single lifetime in the Abbuda hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsati abbudā nirayā; evameko nirabbudo nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, twenty lifetimes in the Abbuda hell equal one lifetime in the Nirabbuda hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsati nirabbudā nirayā; evameko ababo nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twenty lifetimes in the Nirabbuda hell equal one lifetime in the Ababa hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsati ababā nirayā; evameko aṭaṭo nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twenty lifetimes in the Ababa hell equal one lifetime in the Aṭaṭa hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsati aṭaṭā nirayā; evameko ahaho nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twenty lifetimes in the Aṭaṭa hell equal one lifetime in the Ahaha hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsati ahahā nirayā; evameko kumudo nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twenty lifetimes in the Ahaha hell equal one lifetime in the Yellow Lotus hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsati kumudā nirayā; evameko sogandhiko nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twenty lifetimes in the Yellow Lotus hell equal one lifetime in the Sweet-Smelling hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsati sogandhikā nirayā; evameko uppalako nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twenty lifetimes in the Sweet-Smelling hell equal one lifetime in the Blue Water Lily hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsati uppalakā nirayā; evameko puṇḍarīko nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twenty lifetimes in the Blue Water Lily hell equal one lifetime in the White Lotus hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, vīsati puṇḍarīkā nirayā; evameko padumo nirayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twenty lifetimes in the White Lotus hell equal one lifetime in the Pink Lotus hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Padumaṃ kho pana, bhikkhu, nirayaṃ kokāliko bhikkhu upapanno sāriputtamoggallānesu cittaṃ āghātetvā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mendicant Kokālika has been reborn in the Pink Lotus hell because of his resentment for Sāriputta and Moggallāna.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Purisassa hi jātassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A person is born </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuṭhārī jāyate mukhe; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with an axe in their mouth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāya chindati attānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fool cuts themselves with it </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bālo dubbhāsitaṃ bhaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when they say bad words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo nindiyaṃ pasaṃsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you praise someone worthy of criticism, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā nindati yo pasaṃsiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or criticize someone worthy of praise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicināti mukhena so kaliṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you choose bad luck with your own mouth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalinā tena sukhaṃ na vindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll never find happiness that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamattako ayaṃ kali, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bad luck at dice is a trivial thing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo akkhesu dhanaparājayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if all you lose is your money </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbassāpi sahāpi attanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and all you own, even yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva mahattaro kali; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s really terrible luck </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sugatesu manaṃ padūsaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is to hate the holy ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sataṃ sahassānaṃ nirabbudānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For more than two quinquadecillion years, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattiṃsati pañca ca abbudāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and another five quattuordecillion years, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yamariyagarahī nirayaṃ upeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a slanderer of noble ones goes to hell, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vācaṃ manañca paṇidhāya pāpakan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having aimed bad words and thoughts at them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
