<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.005-5. Tatiyaupanisasutta  - 5. Vital Conditions (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.005. 5. Tatiyaupanisasutta  - 5. Vital Conditions (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Ānisaṃsavagga  - 1. Benefits </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho āyasmā ānando bhikkhū āmantesi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">There Venerable Ānanda addressed the mendicants … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dussīlassa, āvuso, sīlavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti avippaṭisāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avippaṭisāre asati avippaṭisāravipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti pāmojjaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāmojje asati pāmojjavipannassa hatūpanisā hoti pīti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no joy, one who lacks joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītiyā asati pītivipannassa hatūpanisā hoti passaddhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital condition for tranquility. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passaddhiyā asati passaddhivipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti sukhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no tranquility, one who lacks tranquility has destroyed a vital condition for bliss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhe asati sukhavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti sammāsamādhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no bliss, one who lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhimhi asati sammāsamādhivipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathābhūtañāṇadassane asati yathābhūtañāṇadassanavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti nibbidāvirāgo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbidāvirāge asati nibbidāvirāgavipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, āvuso, rukkho sākhāpalāsavipanno. Tassa papaṭikāpi na pāripūriṃ gacchati, tacopi … pheggupi … sāropi na pāripūriṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, āvuso, dussīlassa sīlavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti avippaṭisāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avippaṭisāre asati avippaṭisāravipannassa hatūpanisaṃ hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavato, āvuso, sīlasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti avippaṭisāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avippaṭisāre sati avippaṭisārasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti pāmojjaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāmojje sati pāmojjasampannassa upanisasampannā hoti pīti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is joy, one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītiyā sati pītisampannassa upanisasampannā hoti passaddhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a vital condition for tranquility. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passaddhiyā sati passaddhisampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti sukhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is tranquility, one who has fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhe sati sukhasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti sammāsamādhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhimhi sati sammāsamādhisampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathābhūtañāṇadassane sati yathābhūtañāṇadassanasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti nibbidāvirāgo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbidāvirāge sati nibbidāvirāgasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti vimuttiñāṇadassanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, āvuso, rukkho sākhāpalāsasampanno. Tassa papaṭikāpi pāripūriṃ gacchati, tacopi … pheggupi … sāropi pāripūriṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, āvuso, sīlavato sīlasampannassa upanisasampanno hoti avippaṭisāro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avippaṭisāre sati avippaṭisārasampannassa upanisasampannaṃ hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttiñāṇadassanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
