<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.061-61. Avijjāsutta  - 61. Ignorance </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.061. 61. Avijjāsutta  - 61. Ignorance </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Yamakavagga  - 7. Pairs </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Purimā, bhikkhave, koṭi na paññāyati avijjāya: ‘ito pubbe avijjā nāhosi, atha pacchā samabhavī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, it is said that no first point of ignorance is evident, before which there was no ignorance, and afterwards it came to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcetaṃ, bhikkhave, vuccati, atha ca pana paññāyati: ‘idappaccayā avijjā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And yet it is evident that there is a specific condition for ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that ignorance is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro avijjāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for ignorance? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Pañca nīvaraṇā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The five hindrances.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcapāhaṃ, bhikkhave, nīvaraṇe sāhāre vadāmi, no anāhāre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that the five hindrances are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro pañcannaṃ nīvaraṇānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for the five hindrances? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tīṇi duccaritānī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The three kinds of misconduct.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīṇipāhaṃ, bhikkhave, duccaritāni sāhārāni vadāmi, no anāhārāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that the three kinds of misconduct are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro tiṇṇaṃ duccaritānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for the three kinds of misconduct? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Indriyaasaṃvaro’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Lack of sense restraint.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indriyaasaṃvarampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that lack of sense restraint is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro indriyaasaṃvarassa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for lack of sense restraint? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Asatāsampajaññan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asatāsampajaññampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that lack of mindfulness and situational awareness is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro asatāsampajaññassa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for lack of mindfulness and situational awareness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ayonisomanasikāro’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Improper attention.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayonisomanasikārampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that improper attention is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro ayonisomanasikārassa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for improper attention? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Assaddhiyan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Lack of faith.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddhiyampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that lack of faith is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro assaddhiyassa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for lack of faith? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Asaddhammassavanan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Not listening to the true teaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaddhammassavanampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that not listening to the true teaching is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro asaddhammassavanassa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for not listening to the true teaching? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Asappurisasaṃsevo’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Not associating with good people.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, asappurisasaṃsevo paripūro asaddhammassavanaṃ paripūreti, asaddhammassavanaṃ paripūraṃ assaddhiyaṃ paripūreti, assaddhiyaṃ paripūraṃ ayonisomanasikāraṃ paripūreti, ayonisomanasikāro paripūro asatāsampajaññaṃ paripūreti, asatāsampajaññaṃ paripūraṃ indriyaasaṃvaraṃ paripūreti, indriyaasaṃvaro paripūro tīṇi duccaritāni paripūreti, tīṇi duccaritāni paripūrāni pañca nīvaraṇe paripūrenti, pañca nīvaraṇā paripūrā avijjaṃ paripūrenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way, when the factor of not associating with good people is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of not listening to the true teaching. When the factor of not listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of lack of faith … improper attention … lack of mindfulness and situational awareness … lack of sense restraint … the three kinds of misconduct … the five hindrances. When the five hindrances are fulfilled, they fulfill ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametissā avijjāya āhāro hoti, evañca pāripūri. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the fuel for ignorance, and that’s how it’s fulfilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uparipabbate thullaphusitake deve vassante () taṃ udakaṃ yathāninnaṃ pavattamānaṃ pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūreti, pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūrā kusobbhe paripūrenti. Kusobbhā paripūrā mahāsobbhe paripūrenti, mahāsobbhā paripūrā kunnadiyo paripūrenti, kunnadiyo paripūrā mahānadiyo paripūrenti, mahānadiyo paripūrā mahāsamuddaṃ sāgaraṃ paripūrenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like when the rain pours down on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa mahāsamuddassa sāgarassa āhāro hoti, evañca pāripūri. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the fuel for the ocean, and that’s how it’s filled up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, asappurisasaṃsevo paripūro asaddhammassavanaṃ paripūreti, asaddhammassavanaṃ paripūraṃ assaddhiyaṃ paripūreti, assaddhiyaṃ paripūraṃ ayonisomanasikāraṃ paripūreti, ayonisomanasikāro paripūro asatāsampajaññaṃ paripūreti, asatāsampajaññaṃ paripūraṃ indriyaasaṃvaraṃ paripūreti, indriyaasaṃvaro paripūro tīṇi duccaritāni paripūreti, tīṇi duccaritāni paripūrāni pañca nīvaraṇe paripūrenti, pañca nīvaraṇā paripūrā avijjaṃ paripūrenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the factor of not associating with good people is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of not listening to the true teaching. When the factor of not listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of lack of faith … improper attention … lack of mindfulness and situational awareness … lack of sense restraint …the three kinds of misconduct … the five hindrances. When the five hindrances are fulfilled, they fulfill ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametissā avijjāya āhāro hoti, evañca pāripūri. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the fuel for ignorance, and that’s how it’s fulfilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjāvimuttimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that knowledge and freedom are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro vijjāvimuttiyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for knowledge and freedom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Satta bojjhaṅgā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The seven awakening factors.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattapāhaṃ, bhikkhave, bojjhaṅge sāhāre vadāmi, no anāhāre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that the seven awakening factors are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for the seven awakening factors? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Cattāro satipaṭṭhānā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The four kinds of mindfulness meditation.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāropāhaṃ, bhikkhave, satipaṭṭhāne sāhāre vadāmi, no anāhāre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tīṇi sucaritānī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The three kinds of good conduct.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīṇipāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sucaritāni sāhārāni vadāmi, no anāhārāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that the three kinds of good conduct are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro tiṇṇaṃ sucaritānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for the three kinds of good conduct? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Indriyasaṃvaro’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Sense restraint.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indriyasaṃvarampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that sense restraint is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro indriyasaṃvarassa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for sense restraint? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Satisampajaññan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Mindfulness and situational awareness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satisampajaññampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that mindfulness and situational awareness is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro satisampajaññassa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for mindfulness and situational awareness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yonisomanasikāro’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Proper attention.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yonisomanasikārampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that proper attention is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro yonisomanasikārassa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for proper attention? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saddhā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Faith.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that faith is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro saddhāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for faith? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saddhammassavanan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Listening to the true teaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhammassavanampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that listening to the true teaching is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko cāhāro saddhammassavanassa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fuel for listening to the true teaching? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sappurisasaṃsevo’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Associating with good people.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, sappurisasaṃsevo paripūro saddhammassavanaṃ paripūreti, saddhammassavanaṃ paripūraṃ saddhaṃ paripūreti, saddhā paripūrā yonisomanasikāraṃ paripūreti, yonisomanasikāro paripūro satisampajaññaṃ paripūreti, satisampajaññaṃ paripūraṃ indriyasaṃvaraṃ paripūreti, indriyasaṃvaro paripūro tīṇi sucaritāni paripūreti, tīṇi sucaritāni paripūrāni cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūrenti, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā paripūrā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrenti, satta bojjhaṅgā paripūrā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way, when the factor of associating with good people is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to the true teaching. When the factor of listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of faith … proper attention … mindfulness and situational awareness … sense restraint …the three kinds of good conduct … the four kinds of mindfulness meditation … the seven awakening factors. When the seven awakening factors are fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametissā vijjāvimuttiyā āhāro hoti, evañca pāripūri. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the fuel for knowledge and freedom, and that’s how it’s fulfilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uparipabbate thullaphusitake deve vassante taṃ udakaṃ yathāninnaṃ pavattamānaṃ pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūreti, pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūrā kusobbhe paripūrenti, kusobbhā paripūrā mahāsobbhe paripūrenti, mahāsobbhā paripūrā kunnadiyo paripūrenti, kunnadiyo paripūrā mahānadiyo paripūrenti, mahānadiyo paripūrā mahāsamuddaṃ sāgaraṃ paripūrenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like when it rains heavily on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa mahāsamuddassa sāgarassa āhāro hoti, evañca pāripūri. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the fuel for the ocean, and that’s how it’s filled up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, sappurisasaṃsevo paripūro saddhammassavanaṃ paripūreti, saddhammassavanaṃ paripūraṃ saddhaṃ paripūreti, saddhā paripūrā yonisomanasikāraṃ paripūreti, yonisomanasikāro paripūro satisampajaññaṃ paripūreti, satisampajaññaṃ paripūraṃ indriyasaṃvaraṃ paripūreti, indriyasaṃvaro paripūro tīṇi sucaritāni paripūreti, tīṇi sucaritāni paripūrāni cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūrenti, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā paripūrā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrenti, satta bojjhaṅgā paripūrā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the factor of associating with good people is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to the true teaching. When the factor of listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of faith … proper attention … mindfulness and situational awareness … sense restraint …the three kinds of good conduct … the four kinds of mindfulness meditation … the seven awakening factors. When the seven awakening factors are fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametissā vijjāvimuttiyā āhāro hoti, evañca pāripūrī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the fuel for knowledge and freedom, and that’s how it’s fulfilled.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
