<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.071-71. Ākaṅkhasutta  - 71. One Might Wish </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.071. 71. Ākaṅkhasutta  - 71. One Might Wish </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Ākaṅkhavagga  - 8. If You Want </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sampannasīlā, bhikkhave, viharatha sampannapātimokkhā, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvutā viharatha ācāragocarasampannā aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvino, samādāya sikkhatha sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the code of conduct, conducting yourselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo cassaṃ manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā’ti, sīlesvevassa paripūrakārī ajjhattaṃ cetosamathamanuyutto anirākatajjhāno vipassanāya samannāgato brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘May I be liked and approved by my spiritual companions, respected and admired.’ So let them fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘lābhī assaṃ cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānan’ti, sīlesvevassa paripūrakārī ajjhattaṃ cetosamathamanuyutto anirākatajjhāno vipassanāya samannāgato brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘May I receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.’ So let them fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘yesāhaṃ paribhuñjāmi cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ tesaṃ te kārā mahapphalā assu mahānisaṃsā’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘May the services of those whose robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick I enjoy be very fruitful and beneficial for them.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘ye me petā ñātī sālohitā kālaṅkatā pasannacittā anussaranti tesaṃ taṃ mahapphalaṃ assa mahānisaṃsan’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘When deceased family and relatives who have passed away recollect me with a confident mind, may this be very fruitful and beneficial for them.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘santuṭṭho assaṃ itarītaracīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkhārenā’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘May I be content with any kind of robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘khamo assaṃ sītassa uṇhassa jighacchāya pipāsāya ḍaṃsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassānaṃ, duruttānaṃ durāgatānaṃ vacanapathānaṃ uppannānaṃ sārīrikānaṃ vedanānaṃ dukkhānaṃ tibbānaṃ kharānaṃ kaṭukānaṃ asātānaṃ amanāpānaṃ pāṇaharānaṃ adhivāsakajātiko assan’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘May I endure cold, heat, hunger, and thirst. May I endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. May I endure rude and unwelcome criticism. And may I put up with physical pain—sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘aratiratisaho assaṃ, na ca maṃ aratirati saheyya, uppannaṃ aratiratiṃ abhibhuyya abhibhuyya vihareyyan’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘May I prevail over desire and discontent, and may desire and discontent not prevail over me. May I live having mastered desire and discontent whenever they have arisen.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘bhayabheravasaho assaṃ, na ca maṃ bhayabheravo saheyya, uppannaṃ bhayabheravaṃ abhibhuyya abhibhuyya vihareyyan’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘May I prevail over fear and dread, and may fear and dread not prevail over me. May I live having mastered fear and dread whenever they arise.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī assaṃ akicchalābhī akasiralābhī’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘May I get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when I want, without trouble or difficulty.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, sīlesvevassa paripūrakārī ajjhattaṃ cetosamathamanuyutto anirākatajjhāno vipassanāya samannāgato brūhetā suññāgārānaṃ. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant might wish: ‘May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ So let them fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sampannasīlā, bhikkhave, viharatha sampannapātimokkhā, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvutā viharatha ācāragocarasampannā aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvino, samādāya sikkhatha sikkhāpadesū’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the code of conduct, conducting yourselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
