<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.208-208. Dantakaṭṭhasutta  - 208. Chew Sticks </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.208. 208. Dantakaṭṭhasutta  - 208. Chew Sticks </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Kimilavagga  - 21. With Kimbila </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā dantakaṭṭhassa akhādane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of not using chew sticks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acakkhussaṃ, mukhaṃ duggandhaṃ hoti, rasaharaṇiyo na visujjhanti, pittaṃ semhaṃ bhattaṃ pariyonandhati, bhattamassa nacchādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not good for your eyes, you get bad breath, your taste-buds aren’t cleaned, bile and phlegm cover your food, and you lose your appetite. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ādīnavā dantakaṭṭhassa akhādane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five drawbacks of not using chew sticks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, ānisaṃsā dantakaṭṭhassa khādane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five benefits of using chew sticks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhussaṃ, mukhaṃ na duggandhaṃ hoti, rasaharaṇiyo visujjhanti, pittaṃ semhaṃ bhattaṃ na pariyonandhati, bhattamassa chādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good for your eyes, you don’t get bad breath, your taste-buds are cleaned, bile and phlegm don’t cover your food, and food agrees with you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā dantakaṭṭhassa khādane”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five benefits of using chew sticks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
