<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.067-67. Paṭhamaiddhipādasutta  - 67. Bases of Psychic Power (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.067. 67. Paṭhamaiddhipādasutta  - 67. Bases of Psychic Power (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Saññāvagga  - 7. Perceptions </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vā bhikkhunī vā pañca dhamme bhāveti, pañca dhamme bahulīkaroti, tassa dvinnaṃ phalānaṃ aññataraṃ phalaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, any monk or nun who develops and cultivates five qualities can expect one of two results: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enlightenment in the present life, or if there’s something left over, non-return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhipadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasamādhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittasamādhi … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsāsamādhipadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ussoḷhiññeva pañcamiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the fifth is sheer vigor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vā bhikkhunī vā ime pañca dhamme bhāveti, ime pañca dhamme bahulīkaroti, tassa dvinnaṃ phalānaṃ aññataraṃ phalaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk or nun who develops and cultivates these five qualities can expect one of two results: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enlightenment in the present life, or if there’s something left over, non-return.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
