<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.196-196. Mahāsupinasutta  - 196. The Great Dreams </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.196. 196. Mahāsupinasutta  - 196. The Great Dreams </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 20. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato pañca mahāsupinā pāturahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, before his awakening five great dreams appeared to the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, when he was still not awake but intent on awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato ayaṃ mahāpathavī mahāsayanaṃ ahosi, himavā pabbatarājā bibbohanaṃ ahosi, puratthime samudde vāmo hattho ohito ahosi, pacchime samudde dakkhiṇo hattho ohito ahosi, dakkhiṇe samudde ubho pādā ohitā ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This great earth was his bed. Himalaya, king of mountains, was his pillow. His left hand was laid down in the eastern sea. His right hand was laid down in the western sea. And both his feet were laid down in the southern sea. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato ayaṃ paṭhamo mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first great dream that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato tiriyā nāma tiṇajāti nābhiyā uggantvā nabhaṃ āhacca ṭhitā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, a kind of grass called ‘the crosser’ grew up from his navel and stood pressing against the cloudy sky. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato ayaṃ dutiyo mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second great dream that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato setā kimī kaṇhasīsā pādehi ussakkitvā () yāva jāṇumaṇḍalā paṭicchādesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, white caterpillars with black heads crawled up from his feet and covered his knees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato ayaṃ tatiyo mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third great dream that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato cattāro sakuṇā nānāvaṇṇā catūhi disāhi āgantvā pādamūle nipatitvā sabbasetā sampajjiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, four birds of different colors came from the four directions. They fell at his feet, turning pure white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato ayaṃ catuttho mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth great dream that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tathāgato arahaṃ sammāsambuddho pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddho bodhisattova samāno mahato mīḷhapabbatassa uparūpari caṅkamati alippamāno mīḷhena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, he walked back and forth on top of a huge mountain of filth while remaining unsoiled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato ayaṃ pañcamo mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth great dream that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato ayaṃ mahāpathavī mahāsayanaṃ ahosi, himavā pabbatarājā bibbohanaṃ ahosi, puratthime samudde vāmo hattho ohito ahosi, pacchime samudde dakkhiṇo hattho ohito ahosi, dakkhiṇe samudde ubho pādā ohitā ahesuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, as to when, before his awakening, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha was still not awake but intent on awakening. This great earth was his bed. Himalaya, king of mountains, was his pillow. His left hand was laid down in the eastern sea. His right hand was laid down in the western sea. And both his feet were laid down in the southern sea. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathāgatena, bhikkhave, arahatā sammāsambuddhena anuttarā sammāsambodhi abhisambuddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was fulfilled when the Buddha awakened to the perfect awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā abhisambodhāya ayaṃ paṭhamo mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was the first great dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato tiriyā nāma tiṇajāti nābhiyā uggantvā nabhaṃ āhacca ṭhitā ahosi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As to when a kind of grass called ‘the crosser’ grew up from his navel and stood pressing against the cloudy sky. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathāgatena, bhikkhave, arahatā sammāsambuddhena ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo abhisambujjhitvā yāva devamanussehi suppakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was fulfilled when, after the Buddha had awakened to the noble eightfold path, it was well proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa abhisambodhāya ayaṃ dutiyo mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was the second great dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato setā kimī kaṇhasīsā pādehi ussakkitvā yāva jāṇumaṇḍalā paṭicchādesuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As to when white caterpillars with black heads crawled up from his feet and covered his knees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahū, bhikkhave, gihī odātavasanā tathāgataṃ pāṇupetā saraṇaṃ gatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was fulfilled when many white-clothed laypeople went for refuge to him for life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa abhisambodhāya ayaṃ tatiyo mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was the third great dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato cattāro sakuṇā nānāvaṇṇā catūhi disāhi āgantvā pādamūle nipatitvā sabbasetā sampajjiṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As to when four birds of different colors came from the four directions. They fell at his feet, turning pure white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattārome, bhikkhave, vaṇṇā khattiyā brāhmaṇā vessā suddā te tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitvā anuttaraṃ vimuttiṃ sacchikaronti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was fulfilled when members of the four castes—aristocrats, brahmins, merchants, and workers—went forth from the lay life to homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One and realized supreme freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa abhisambodhāya ayaṃ catuttho mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was the fourth great dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato arahaṃ sammāsambuddho pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddho bodhisattova samāno mahato mīḷhapabbatassa uparūpari caṅkamati alippamāno mīḷhena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As to when he walked back and forth on top of a huge mountain of filth while remaining unsoiled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lābhī, bhikkhave, tathāgato cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ, taṃ tathāgato agathito amucchito anajjhosanno ādīnavadassāvī nissaraṇapañño paribhuñjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was fulfilled when the Realized One received robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And he used them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa abhisambodhāya ayaṃ pañcamo mahāsupino pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was the fifth great dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, bhikkhave, arahato sammāsambuddhassa pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato ime pañca mahāsupinā pāturahesun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Before his awakening these five great dreams appeared to the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, when he was still not awake but intent on awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
