<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.037-37. Bhojanasutta  - 37. Food </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.037. 37. Bhojanasutta  - 37. Food </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sumanavagga  - 4. With Sumanā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhojanaṃ, bhikkhave, dadamāno dāyako paṭiggāhakānaṃ pañca ṭhānāni deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a giver gives food, they give the recipients five things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyuṃ deti, vaṇṇaṃ deti, sukhaṃ deti, balaṃ deti, paṭibhānaṃ deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Long life, beauty, happiness, strength, and eloquence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyuṃ kho pana datvā āyussa bhāgī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving long life, they have long life as a god or human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṇṇaṃ datvā vaṇṇassa bhāgī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving beauty, they have beauty as a god or human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhaṃ datvā sukhassa bhāgī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving happiness, they have happiness as a god or human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">balaṃ datvā balassa bhāgī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving strength, they have strength as a god or human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibhānaṃ datvā paṭibhānassa bhāgī hoti dibbassa vā mānusassa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving eloquence, they are eloquent as a god or human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanaṃ, bhikkhave, dadamāno dāyako paṭiggāhakānaṃ imāni pañca ṭhānāni detīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a giver gives food, they give the recipients five things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyudo balado dhīro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wise one is a giver of life, strength, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṇṇado paṭibhānado; </span></p>
<p class="p3">beauty, and eloquence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhassa dātā medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An intelligent giver of happiness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhaṃ so adhigacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">gains happiness in return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyuṃ datvā balaṃ vaṇṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving life, strength, beauty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhañca paṭibhānakaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">happiness, and eloquence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīghāyu yasavā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re long-lived and famous </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha yatthūpapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever they’re reborn.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
