<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.034-34. Sīhasenāpatisutta  - 34. With General Sīha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.034. 34. Sīhasenāpatisutta  - 34. With General Sīha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sumanavagga  - 4. With Sumanā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sīho senāpati yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho sīho senāpati bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then General Sīha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sakkā nu kho, bhante, bhagavā sandiṭṭhikaṃ dānaphalaṃ paññāpetun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, can you point out a fruit of giving that’s apparent in the present life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkā, sīhā”ti bhagavā avoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I can, Sīha,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dāyako, sīha, dānapati bahuno janassa piyo hoti manāpo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A giver, a donor is dear and beloved to many people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, sīha, dāyako dānapati bahuno janassa piyo hoti manāpo, idampi sandiṭṭhikaṃ dānaphalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a fruit of giving that’s apparent in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, sīha, dāyakaṃ dānapatiṃ santo sappurisā bhajanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, good people associate with a giver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, sīha, dāyakaṃ dānapatiṃ santo sappurisā bhajanti, idampi sandiṭṭhikaṃ dānaphalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is another fruit of giving that’s apparent in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, sīha, dāyakassa dānapatino kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a giver gains a good reputation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, sīha, dāyakassa dānapatino kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggacchati, idampi sandiṭṭhikaṃ dānaphalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is another fruit of giving that’s apparent in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, sīha, dāyako dānapati yaṃ yadeva parisaṃ upasaṅkamati—yadi khattiyaparisaṃ yadi brāhmaṇaparisaṃ yadi gahapatiparisaṃ yadi samaṇaparisaṃ—visārado upasaṅkamati amaṅkubhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a giver enters any kind of assembly bold and assured, whether it’s an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or ascetics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, sīha, dāyako dānapati yaṃ yadeva parisaṃ upasaṅkamati—yadi khattiyaparisaṃ yadi brāhmaṇaparisaṃ yadi gahapatiparisaṃ yadi samaṇaparisaṃ—visārado upasaṅkamati amaṅkubhūto, idampi sandiṭṭhikaṃ dānaphalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is another fruit of giving that’s apparent in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, sīha, dāyako dānapati kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, when a giver’s body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, sīha, dāyako dānapati kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati, idaṃ samparāyikaṃ dānaphalan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is a fruit of giving to do with lives to come.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, sīho senāpati bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, General Sīha said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yānimāni, bhante, bhagavatā cattāri sandiṭṭhikāni dānaphalāni akkhātāni, nāhaṃ ettha bhagavato saddhāya gacchāmi; ahaṃ petāni jānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When it comes to those four fruits of giving that are apparent in the present life, I don’t have to rely on faith in the Buddha, for I know them too. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ, bhante, dāyako dānapati bahuno janassa piyo manāpo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m a giver, a donor, and am dear and beloved to many people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ, bhante, dāyako dānapati; maṃ santo sappurisā bhajanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m a giver, and good people associate with me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ, bhante, dāyako dānapati; mayhaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: ‘sīho senāpati dāyako kārako saṅghupaṭṭhāko’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m a giver, and I have this good reputation: ‘General Sīha gives, serves, and attends on the Saṅgha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ, bhante, dāyako dānapati yaṃ yadeva parisaṃ upasaṅkamāmi—yadi khattiyaparisaṃ yadi brāhmaṇaparisaṃ yadi gahapatiparisaṃ yadi samaṇaparisaṃ—visārado upasaṅkamāmi amaṅkubhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m a giver, and I enter any kind of assembly bold and assured, whether it’s an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or ascetics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yānimāni, bhante, bhagavatā cattāri sandiṭṭhikāni dānaphalāni akkhātāni, nāhaṃ ettha bhagavato saddhāya gacchāmi; ahaṃ petāni jānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to these four fruits of giving that are apparent in the present life, I don’t have to rely on faith in the Buddha, for I know them too. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañca kho maṃ, bhante, bhagavā evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when the Buddha says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘dāyako, sīha, dānapati kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjatī’ti, etāhaṃ na jānāmi; ettha ca panāhaṃ bhagavato saddhāya gacchāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When a giver’s body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ I don’t know this, so I have to rely on faith in the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, sīha, evametaṃ, sīha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, Sīha! That’s so true! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dāyako dānapati kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a giver’s body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadaṃ piyo hoti bhajanti naṃ bahū, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving, you’re loved and befriended by many people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittiñca pappoti yaso ca vaḍḍhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You get a good reputation, and your fame grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amaṅkubhūto parisaṃ vigāhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A generous man enters an assembly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visārado hoti naro amaccharī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">bold and assured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi dānāni dadanti paṇḍitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So an astute person, seeking happiness, would give gifts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vineyya maccheramalaṃ sukhesino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">having driven out the stain of stinginess. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te dīgharattaṃ tidive patiṭṭhitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live long in the heaven of the Three and Thirty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devānaṃ sahabyagatā ramanti te. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enjoying the company of the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katāvakāsā katakusalā ito cutā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having taken the opportunity to do good, when they pass from here </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sayaṃpabhā anuvicaranti nandanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they wander radiant in the Garden of Delight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tattha nandanti ramanti modare, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There they delight, rejoice, and enjoy themselves, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samappitā kāmaguṇehi pañcahi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katvāna vākyaṃ asitassa tādino, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Doing what the unattached, the poised one says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ramanti sagge sugatassa sāvakā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">disciples of the Holy One rejoice in heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
