<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.153-153. Tatiyasammattaniyāmasutta  - 153. Inevitability Regarding the Right Path (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.153. 153. Tatiyasammattaniyāmasutta  - 153. Inevitability Regarding the Right Path (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Saddhammavagga  - 16. The True Teaching </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato suṇantopi saddhammaṃ abhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Makkhī dhammaṃ suṇāti makkhapariyuṭṭhito, upārambhacitto dhammaṃ suṇāti randhagavesī, dhammadesake āhatacitto hoti khīlajāto, duppañño hoti jaḷo eḷamūgo, anaññāte aññātamānī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They listen to the teaching bent only on putting it down. They listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind. They’re antagonistic to the teacher, planning to attack them. They’re witless, dull, and stupid. And they think they know what they don’t know. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato suṇantopi saddhammaṃ abhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these five qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato suṇanto saddhammaṃ bhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amakkhī dhammaṃ suṇāti na makkhapariyuṭṭhito, anupārambhacitto dhammaṃ suṇāti na randhagavesī, dhammadesake anāhatacitto hoti akhīlajāto, paññavā hoti ajaḷo aneḷamūgo, na anaññāte aññātamānī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t listen to the teaching bent only on putting it down. They don’t listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind. They’re not antagonistic to the teacher, and not planning to attack them. They’re wise, bright, and clever. And they don’t think they know what they don’t know. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato suṇanto saddhammaṃ bhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
