<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.222-222. Dutiyadīghacārikasutta  - 222. Long Wandering (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.222. 222. Dutiyadīghacārikasutta  - 222. Long Wandering (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">23. Dīghacārikavagga  - 23. Long Wandering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā dīghacārikaṃ anavatthacārikaṃ anuyuttassa viharato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for someone who likes long and aimless wandering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhigataṃ nādhigacchati, adhigatā parihāyati, adhigatenekaccena avisārado hoti, gāḷhaṃ rogātaṅkaṃ phusati, na ca mittavā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You don’t achieve the unachieved. What you have achieved falls away. You lose confidence in some things you’ve achieved. You contract a severe illness. You don’t have any friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ādīnavā dīghacārikaṃ anavatthacārikaṃ anuyuttassa viharato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five drawbacks for someone who likes long and aimless wandering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, ānisaṃsā samavatthacāre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five benefits of a reasonable amount of wandering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhigataṃ adhigacchati, adhigatā na parihāyati, adhigatenekaccena visārado hoti, na gāḷhaṃ rogātaṅkaṃ phusati, mittavā ca hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You achieve the unachieved. What you have achieved doesn’t fall away. You’re confident in some things you’ve achieved. You don’t contract severe illness. You have friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā samavatthacāre”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five benefits of a reasonable amount of wandering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
