<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.228-228. Ussūrabhattasutta  - 228. Eating Late </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.228. 228. Ussūrabhattasutta  - 228. Eating Late </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">23. Dīghacārikavagga  - 23. Long Wandering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā ussūrabhatte kule. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a family who takes their meals late in the day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te atithī pāhunā, te na kālena paṭipūjenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When guests visit, they are not served on time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā tā balipaṭiggāhikā devatā, tā na kālena paṭipūjenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deities who accept spirit-offerings are not served on time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā ekabhattikā rattūparatā viratā vikālabhojanā, te na kālena paṭipūjenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ascetics and brahmins who eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night, and from food at the wrong time are not served on time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāsakammakaraporisā vimukhā kammaṃ karonti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bondservants, workers, and staff do their duties neglectfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāvatakaṃyeva asamayena bhuttaṃ anojavantaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A meal eaten during the wrong period is not nutritious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ādīnavā ussūrabhatte kule. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five drawbacks for a family who takes their meals late in the day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, ānisaṃsā samayabhatte kule. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five benefits for a family who takes their meals at a proper time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te atithī pāhunā, te kālena paṭipūjenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When guests visit, they are served on time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā tā balipaṭiggāhikā devatā, tā kālena paṭipūjenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deities who accept spirit-offerings are served on time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā ekabhattikā rattūparatā viratā vikālabhojanā, te kālena paṭipūjenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ascetics and brahmins who eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night, and from food at the wrong time are served on time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāsakammakaraporisā avimukhā kammaṃ karonti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bondservants, workers, and staff do their duties attentively. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāvatakaṃyeva samayena bhuttaṃ ojavantaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A meal eaten during the proper period is nutritious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā samayabhatte kule”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five benefits for a family who takes their meals at a proper time.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
