<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.174-174. Verasutta  - 174. Threats </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.174. 174. Verasutta  - 174. Threats </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Upāsakavagga  - 18. A Lay Follower </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañca, gahapati, bhayāni verāni appahāya ‘dussīlo’ iti vuccati, nirayañca upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, unless these five dangers and threats are given up, one is said to be unethical, and is reborn in hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātaṃ, adinnādānaṃ, kāmesumicchācāraṃ, musāvādaṃ, surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Killing living creatures, stealing, committing sexual misconduct, lying, and using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, gahapati, pañca bhayāni verāni appahāya ‘dussīlo’ iti vuccati, nirayañca upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Unless these five dangers and threats are given up, one is said to be unethical, and is reborn in hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañca, gahapati, bhayāni verāni pahāya ‘sīlavā’ iti vuccati, sugatiñca upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once these five dangers and threats are given up, one is said to be ethical, and is reborn in heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātaṃ, adinnādānaṃ, kāmesumicchācāraṃ, musāvādaṃ, surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Killing living creatures, stealing, committing sexual misconduct, lying, and using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, gahapati, pañca bhayāni verāni pahāya ‘sīlavā’ iti vuccati, sugatiñca upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once these five dangers and threats are given up, one is said to be ethical, and is reborn in heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, gahapati, pāṇātipātī pāṇātipātapaccayā diṭṭhadhammikampi bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, samparāyikampi bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti, pāṇātipātā paṭivirato neva diṭṭhadhammikaṃ bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, na samparāyikaṃ bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, na cetasikaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in the present life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from killing living creatures creates no dangers and threats either in the present life or in lives to come, and doesn’t experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātā paṭiviratassa evaṃ taṃ bhayaṃ veraṃ vūpasantaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains from killing living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, gahapati, adinnādāyī … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who steals … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, gahapati, kāmesumicchācārī … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who commits sexual misconduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, gahapati, musāvādī … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who lies … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, gahapati, surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhāyī surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānapaccayā diṭṭhadhammikampi bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, samparāyikampi bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti, surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭivirato neva diṭṭhadhammikaṃ bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, na samparāyikaṃ bhayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, na cetasikaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who uses alcoholic drinks that cause negligence creates dangers and threats both in the present life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence creates no dangers and threats either in the present life or in lives to come, and doesn’t experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭiviratassa evaṃ taṃ bhayaṃ veraṃ vūpasantaṃ hotīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains from using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo pāṇamatipāteti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person in the world kills living creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādañca bhāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">speaks falsely, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Loke adinnaṃ ādiyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">steals, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paradārañca gacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">commits adultery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāmerayapānañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and indulges in drinking </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo naro anuyuñjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">alcohol and liquor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appahāya pañca verāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Unless they give up these five threats, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dussīlo iti vuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re said to be unethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyassa bhedā duppañño, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, that witless person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirayaṃ sopapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reborn in hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo pāṇaṃ nātipāteti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person in the world doesn’t kill living creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādaṃ na bhāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">speak falsely, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Loke adinnaṃ nādiyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">steal, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paradāraṃ na gacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">commit adultery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāmerayapānañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">or indulge in drinking </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo naro nānuyuñjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">alcohol and liquor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahāya pañca verāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up these five threats, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlavā iti vuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re said to be ethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyassa bhedā sappañño, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, that wise person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sugatiṃ sopapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reborn in a good place.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
