<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.038-38. Saddhasutta  - 38. Faith </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.038. 38. Saddhasutta  - 38. Faith </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Sumanavagga  - 4. With Sumanā </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, saddhe kulaputte ānisaṃsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a faithful gentleman gets five benefits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te, bhikkhave, loke santo sappurisā te saddhaññeva paṭhamaṃ anukampantā anukampanti, no tathā assaddhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The good persons in the world show compassion first to the faithful, not so much to the unfaithful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhaññeva paṭhamaṃ upasaṅkamantā upasaṅkamanti, no tathā assaddhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They first approach the faithful, not so much the unfaithful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhaññeva paṭhamaṃ paṭiggaṇhantā paṭiggaṇhanti, no tathā assaddhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They first receive alms from the faithful, not so much the unfaithful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhaññeva paṭhamaṃ dhammaṃ desentā desenti, no tathā assaddhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They first teach Dhamma to the faithful, not so much the unfaithful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddho kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, the faithful are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca saddhe kulaputte ānisaṃsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A faithful gentleman gets these five benefits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, subhūmiyaṃ catumahāpathe mahānigrodho samantā pakkhīnaṃ paṭisaraṇaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a great banyan tree at a level crossroads. It would become a refuge for birds from all around. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, saddho kulaputto bahuno janassa paṭisaraṇaṃ hoti bhikkhūnaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ upāsakānaṃ upāsikānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a faithful gentleman becomes a refuge for many people—monks, nuns, laywomen, and laymen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sākhāpattaphalūpeto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With its branches, leaves, and fruit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khandhimāva mahādumo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a great tree with its strong trunk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mūlavā phalasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">firmly-rooted and fruit-bearing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">patiṭṭhā hoti pakkhinaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">supports many birds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manorame āyatane, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a lovely place, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sevanti naṃ vihaṅgamā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">frequented by the sky-soarers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chāyaṃ chāyatthikā yanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those that need shade go in the shade, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phalatthā phalabhojino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those that need fruit enjoy the fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatheva sīlasampannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So too, a faithful individual </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhaṃ purisapuggalaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is perfect in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nivātavuttiṃ atthaddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">humble and kind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sorataṃ sakhilaṃ muduṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">sweet, friendly, and tender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vītarāgā vītadosā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those free of greed, freed of hate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vītamohā anāsavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">free of delusion, undefiled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññakkhettāni lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">fields of merit for the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sevanti tādisaṃ naraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">associate with such a person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tassa dhammaṃ desenti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They teach them the Dhamma, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbadukkhāpanūdanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that dispels all suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ so dhammaṃ idhaññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Understanding this teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbāti anāsavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re extinguished without defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
