<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.111-111. Kulūpakasutta  - 111. Visiting Families </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.111. 111. Kulūpakasutta  - 111. Visiting Families </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Andhakavindavagga  - 12. At Andhakavinda </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato kulūpako bhikkhu kulesu appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities who visits families is unlikable and unlovable, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asanthavavissāsī ca hoti, anissaravikappī ca, vissaṭṭhupasevī ca, upakaṇṇakajappī ca, atiyācanako ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They act as though they're close to people they hardly know. They give away things they don’t own. They over-associate with close friends. They whisper in the ear. And they ask for too much. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato kulūpako bhikkhu kulesu appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these five qualities who visits families is unlikable and unlovable, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato kulūpako bhikkhu kulesu piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with five qualities who visits families is dear and beloved, respected and admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na asanthavavissāsī ca hoti, na anissaravikappī ca, na vissaṭṭhupasevī ca, na upakaṇṇakajappī ca, na atiyācanako ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t act as though they're close to people they hardly know. They don’t give away things they don’t own. They don’t over-associate with close friends. They don’t whisper in the ear. And they don’t ask for too much. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato kulūpako bhikkhu kulesu piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these five qualities who visits families is dear and beloved, respected and admired.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
