<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.143-143. Sārandadasutta  - 143. At Sārandada </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.143. 143. Sārandadasutta  - 143. At Sārandada </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Tikaṇḍakīvagga  - 15. At Tikaṇḍakī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya vesāliṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena pañcamattānaṃ licchavisatānaṃ sārandade cetiye sannisinnānaṃ sannipatitānaṃ ayamantarākathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time around five hundred Licchavis were sitting together at the Sārandada shrine, and this discussion came up among them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pañcannaṃ ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthiratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ, assaratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ, maṇiratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ, itthiratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ, gahapatiratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The elephant-treasure, the horse-treasure, the jewel-treasure, the woman-treasure, and the householder-treasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ pañcannaṃ ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The appearance of these five treasures is rare in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te licchavī magge purisaṃ ṭhapesuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those Licchavis sent a man out on to the road, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yadā tvaṃ, ambho purisa, passeyyāsi bhagavantaṃ, atha amhākaṃ āroceyyāsī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mister, please tell us when you see the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho so puriso bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That man saw the Buddha coming off in the distance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">disvāna yena te licchavī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te licchavī etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He went to the Licchavis and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ so, bhante, bhagavā gacchati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sirs, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha is coming. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassadāni kālaṃ maññathā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te licchavī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho te licchavī bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those Licchavis went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante, yena sārandadaṃ cetiyaṃ tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please go to the Sārandada shrine, out of compassion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā yena sārandadaṃ cetiyaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Nisajja kho bhagavā te licchavī etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha went up to the Sārandada shrine, where he sat on the seat spread out, and said to the Licchavis, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kāya nuttha, licchavī, etarahi kathāya sannisinnā, kā ca pana vo antarākathā vippakatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Licchavis, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was unfinished?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhante, amhākaṃ sannisinnānaṃ sannipatitānaṃ ayamantarākathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, Master Gotama, this discussion came up among us while we were sitting together: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pañcannaṃ ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. …’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthiratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ, assaratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ, maṇiratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ, itthiratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ, gahapatiratanassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ pañcannaṃ ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmin’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kāmādhimuttānaṃ vata bho licchavīnaṃ kāmaṃyeva ārabbha antarākathā udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You Licchavis are so fixated on sensual pleasures, that’s the only discussion that came up! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcannaṃ, licchavī, ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Licchavis, the appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa arahato sammāsambuddhassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The appearance of a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathāgatappaveditassa dhammavinayassa desetā puggalo dullabho lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who explains the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathāgatappaveditassa dhammavinayassa desitassa viññātā puggalo dullabho lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who understands the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathāgatappaveditassa dhammavinayassa desitassa viññātā dhammānudhammappaṭipanno puggalo dullabho lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who practices in line with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kataññū katavedī puggalo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who is grateful and thankful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, licchavī, pañcannaṃ ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The appearance of these five treasures is rare in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
