<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.132-132. Dutiyacakkānuvattanasutta  - 132. Wielding Power (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.132. 132. Dutiyacakkānuvattanasutta  - 132. Wielding Power (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Rājavagga  - 14. Kings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato rañño cakkavattissa jeṭṭho putto pitarā pavattitaṃ cakkaṃ dhammeneva anuppavatteti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, possessing five factors a wheel-turning monarch’s eldest son continues to wield the power set in motion by his father only in a principled manner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ hoti cakkaṃ appaṭivattiyaṃ kenaci manussabhūtena paccatthikena pāṇinā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this power cannot be undermined by any human enemy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño cakkavattissa jeṭṭho putto atthaññū ca hoti, dhammaññū ca, mattaññū ca, kālaññū ca, parisaññū ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wheel-turning monarch’s oldest son knows what is right, knows principle, knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi aṅgehi samannāgato rañño cakkavattissa jeṭṭho putto pitarā pavattitaṃ cakkaṃ dhammeneva anuppavatteti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wheel-turning monarch’s oldest son who possesses these five factors continues to wield the power set in motion by his father only in a principled manner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ hoti cakkaṃ appaṭivattiyaṃ kenaci manussabhūtena paccatthikena pāṇinā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this power cannot be undermined by any human enemy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato sāriputto tathāgatena anuttaraṃ dhammacakkaṃ pavattitaṃ sammadeva anuppavatteti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, possessing five factors Sāriputta rightly keeps rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ hoti cakkaṃ appaṭivattiyaṃ samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that wheel cannot be turned back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, sāriputto atthaññū, dhammaññū, mattaññū, kālaññū, parisaññū. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta knows what is right, knows principle, knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato sāriputto tathāgatena anuttaraṃ dhammacakkaṃ pavattitaṃ sammadeva anuppavatteti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these five factors Sāriputta rightly keeps rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ hoti cakkaṃ appaṭivattiyaṃ samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that wheel cannot be turned back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
