<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.107-107. Sīlasutta  - 107. Ethics </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.107. 107. Sīlasutta  - 107. Ethics </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Phāsuvihāravagga  - 11. Living Comfortably </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with five factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlasampanno hoti, samādhisampanno hoti, paññāsampanno hoti, vimuttisampanno hoti, vimuttiñāṇadassanasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
