<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.195-195. Piṅgiyānīsutta  - 195. Piṅgiyānī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.195. 195. Piṅgiyānīsutta  - 195. Piṅgiyānī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 20. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena pañcamattāni licchavisatāni bhagavantaṃ payirupāsanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time around five hundred Licchavis were visiting the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appekacce licchavī nīlā honti nīlavaṇṇā nīlavatthā nīlālaṅkārā, appekacce licchavī pītā honti pītavaṇṇā pītavatthā pītālaṅkārā, appekacce licchavī lohitakā honti lohitakavaṇṇā lohitakavatthā lohitakālaṅkārā, appekacce licchavī odātā honti odātavaṇṇā odātavatthā odātālaṅkārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some of the Licchavis were in blue, of blue color, clad in blue, adorned with blue. And some were similarly colored in yellow, red, or white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tyassudaṃ bhagavā atirocati vaṇṇena ceva yasasā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha outshone them all in beauty and glory. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho piṅgiyānī brāhmaṇo uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Piṅgīyānī got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭibhāti maṃ, bhagavā, paṭibhāti maṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to speak, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭibhātu taṃ piṅgiyānī”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then speak as you feel inspired,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho piṅgiyānī brāhmaṇo bhagavato sammukhā sāruppāya gāthāya abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the brahmin Piṅgīyānī extolled the Buddha in his presence with a fitting verse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Padmaṃ yathā kokanadaṃ sugandhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Like a fragrant pink lotus </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāto siyā phullamavītagandhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that blooms in the morning, its fragrance unfaded—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṅgīrasaṃ passa virocamānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">see Aṅgīrasa shine, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tapantamādiccamivantalikkhe”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">bright as the sun in the sky!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te licchavī pañcahi uttarāsaṅgasatehi piṅgiyāniṃ brāhmaṇaṃ acchādesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those Licchavis clothed Piṅgiyānī with five hundred upper robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho piṅgiyānī brāhmaṇo tehi pañcahi uttarāsaṅgasatehi bhagavantaṃ acchādesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Piṅgiyānī clothed the Buddha with them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā te licchavī etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to the Licchavis: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pañcannaṃ, licchavī, ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Licchavis, the appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ pañcannaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa arahato sammāsambuddhassa pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatappaveditassa dhammavinayassa desetā puggalo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who explains the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatappaveditassa dhammavinayassa desitassa viññātā puggalo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who understands the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatappaveditassa dhammavinayassa desitassa viññātā dhammānudhammappaṭipanno puggalo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who practices in line with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kataññū katavedī puggalo dullabho lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who is grateful and thankful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, licchavī, pañcannaṃ ratanānaṃ pātubhāvo dullabho lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The appearance of these five treasures is rare in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
