<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.226-226. Dutiyakulūpakasutta  - 226. Visiting Families (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.226. 226. Dutiyakulūpakasutta  - 226. Visiting Families (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">23. Dīghacārikavagga  - 23. Long Wandering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā kulūpakassa bhikkhuno ativelaṃ kulesu saṃsaṭṭhassa viharato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a mendicant who visits families for too long, mixing closely with them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmassa abhiṇhadassanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You often see members of the opposite sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dassane sati saṃsaggo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing them, you become close. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃsagge sati vissāso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being so close, you become intimate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vissāse sati otāro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being intimate, lust overcomes you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">otiṇṇacittassetaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ: ‘anabhirato vā brahmacariyaṃ carissati aññataraṃ vā saṅkiliṭṭhaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjissati sikkhaṃ vā paccakkhāya hīnāyāvattissati’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When your mind is swamped by lust, you can expect that you will live the spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit one of the corrupt offenses, or reject the training and return to a lesser life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ādīnavā kulūpakassa bhikkhuno ativelaṃ kulesu saṃsaṭṭhassa viharato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five drawbacks for a mendicant who visits families for too long, mixing closely with them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
