<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.191-191. Soṇasutta  - 191. Dogs </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.191. 191. Soṇasutta  - 191. Dogs </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 20. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, porāṇā brāhmaṇadhammā etarahi sunakhesu sandissanti, no brāhmaṇesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these five traditions of the brahmins are seen these days among dogs, but not among brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe sudaṃ, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā brāhmaṇiṃyeva gacchanti, no abrāhmaṇiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past brahmins had sex only with brahmin women, not with others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā brāhmaṇimpi gacchanti, abrāhmaṇimpi gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These days brahmins have sex with both brahmin women and others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, sunakhā sunakhiṃyeva gacchanti, no asunakhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But these days dogs have sex only with female dogs, not with other species. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo porāṇo brāhmaṇadhammo etarahi sunakhesu sandissati, no brāhmaṇesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first tradition of the brahmins seen these days among dogs, but not among brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe sudaṃ, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā brāhmaṇiṃ utuniṃyeva gacchanti, no anutuniṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past brahmins had sex only with brahmin women in the fertile half of the month that starts with menstruation, not at other times. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā brāhmaṇiṃ utunimpi gacchanti, anutunimpi gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These days brahmins have sex with brahmin women both in the fertile half of the month and at other times. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, sunakhā sunakhiṃ utuniṃyeva gacchanti, no anutuniṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But these days dogs have sex only with female dogs when they are in heat, not at other times. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo porāṇo brāhmaṇadhammo etarahi sunakhesu sandissati, no brāhmaṇesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second tradition of the brahmins seen these days among dogs, but not among brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe sudaṃ, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā brāhmaṇiṃ neva kiṇanti no vikkiṇanti, sampiyeneva saṃvāsaṃ sambandhāya sampavattenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past brahmins neither bought nor sold brahmin women. They lived together because they loved each other and wanted their family line to continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā brāhmaṇiṃ kiṇantipi vikkiṇantipi, sampiyenapi saṃvāsaṃ sambandhāya sampavattenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These days brahmins both buy and sell brahmin women. They live together whether they love each other or not and they want their family line to continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, sunakhā sunakhiṃ neva kiṇanti no vikkiṇanti, sampiyeneva saṃvāsaṃ sambandhāya sampavattenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But these days dogs neither buy nor sell female dogs. They live together because they’re attracted to each other and want their family line to continue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo porāṇo brāhmaṇadhammo etarahi sunakhesu sandissati, no brāhmaṇesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third tradition of the brahmins seen these days among dogs, but not among brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe sudaṃ, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā na sannidhiṃ karonti dhanassapi dhaññassapi rajatassapi jātarūpassapi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past brahmins did not store up money, grain, silver, or gold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā sannidhiṃ karonti dhanassapi dhaññassapi rajatassapi jātarūpassapi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These days brahmins do store up money, grain, silver, and gold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, sunakhā na sannidhiṃ karonti dhanassapi dhaññassapi rajatassapi jātarūpassapi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But these days dogs don’t store up money, grain, silver, or gold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho porāṇo brāhmaṇadhammo etarahi sunakhesu sandissati, no brāhmaṇesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth tradition of the brahmins seen these days among dogs, but not among brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe sudaṃ, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā sāyaṃ sāyamāsāya pāto pātarāsāya bhikkhaṃ pariyesanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past brahmins went looking for almsfood for dinner in the evening, and for breakfast in the morning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇā yāvadatthaṃ udarāvadehakaṃ bhuñjitvā avasesaṃ ādāya pakkamanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These days brahmins eat as much as they like until their bellies are full, then take away the leftovers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhikkhave, sunakhā sāyaṃ sāyamāsāya pāto pātarāsāya bhikkhaṃ pariyesanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But these days dogs go looking for dinner in the evening, and for breakfast in the morning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamo porāṇo brāhmaṇadhammo etarahi sunakhesu sandissati, no brāhmaṇesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth tradition of the brahmins seen these days among dogs, but not among brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca porāṇā brāhmaṇadhammā etarahi sunakhesu sandissanti, no brāhmaṇesū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five traditions of the brahmins are seen these days among dogs, but not among brahmins.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
