<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.021-21. Paṭhamaagāravasutta  - 21. Disrespect (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.021. 21. Paṭhamaagāravasutta  - 21. Disrespect (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Pañcaṅgikavagga  - 3. With Five Factors </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“So vata, bhikkhave, bhikkhu agāravo appatisso asabhāgavuttiko ‘sabrahmacārīsu ābhisamācārikaṃ dhammaṃ paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, it’s simply impossible for a disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with incompatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing with supplementary regulations regarding their spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ābhisamācārikaṃ dhammaṃ aparipūretvā sekhaṃ dhammaṃ paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without fulfilling the practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it’s impossible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sekhaṃ dhammaṃ aparipūretvā sīlāni paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without fulfilling the practice of a trainee, it’s impossible to fulfill ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sīlāni aparipūretvā sammādiṭṭhiṃ paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without fulfilling ethics, it’s impossible to fulfill right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sammādiṭṭhiṃ aparipūretvā sammāsamādhiṃ paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without fulfilling right view, it’s impossible to fulfill right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vata, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sagāravo sappatisso sabhāgavuttiko ‘sabrahmacārīsu ābhisamācārikaṃ dhammaṃ paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it is possible for a respectful and reverent mendicant with compatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing with supplementary regulations regarding their spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ābhisamācārikaṃ dhammaṃ paripūretvā sekhaṃ dhammaṃ paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having fulfilled the practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it’s possible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sekhaṃ dhammaṃ paripūretvā sīlāni paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having fulfilled the practice of a trainee, it’s possible to fulfill ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sīlāni paripūretvā sammādiṭṭhiṃ paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having fulfilled ethics, it’s possible to fulfill right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sammādiṭṭhiṃ paripūretvā sammāsamādhiṃ paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having fulfilled right view, it’s possible to fulfill right immersion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
