<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.068-68. Dutiyaiddhipādasutta  - 68. Bases of Psychic Power (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.068. 68. Dutiyaiddhipādasutta  - 68. Bases of Psychic Power (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Saññāvagga  - 7. Perceptions </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbevāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sambodhā anabhisambuddho bodhisattova samāno pañca dhamme bhāvesiṃ, pañca dhamme bahulīkāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still not awake but intent on awakening—I developed and cultivated five things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandasamādhipadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāvesiṃ, vīriyasamādhi … cittasamādhi … vīmaṃsāsamādhipadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāvesiṃ, ussoḷhiññeva pañcamiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort … the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort … the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort … the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. And the fifth is sheer vigor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho ahaṃ, bhikkhave, imesaṃ ussoḷhipañcamānaṃ dhammānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā yassa yassa abhiññāsacchikaraṇīyassa dhammassa cittaṃ abhininnāmesiṃ abhiññāsacchikiriyāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I had developed and cultivated these five things, with vigor as fifth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇiṃ sati sati āyatane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I became capable of realizing anything that can be realized by insight to which I extended the mind, in each and every case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhiṃ: ‘anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhaveyyaṃ … pe … yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vatteyyan’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I wished: ‘May I multiply myself and become one again … controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇiṃ sati sati āyatane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I was capable of realizing it, in each and every case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhiṃ … pe … ‘āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I wished: … ‘May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇiṃ sati sati āyatane”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I was capable of realizing it, in each and every case.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
