<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.194-194. Kāraṇapālīsutta  - 194. With Kāraṇapālī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.194. 194. Kāraṇapālīsutta  - 194. With Kāraṇapālī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">20. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 20. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena kāraṇapālī brāhmaṇo licchavīnaṃ kammantaṃ kāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmin Kāraṇapālī was working for the Licchavis. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho kāraṇapālī brāhmaṇo piṅgiyāniṃ brāhmaṇaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He saw the brahmin Piṅgiyānī coming off in the distance </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">disvā piṅgiyāniṃ brāhmaṇaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Handa kuto nu bhavaṃ piṅgiyānī āgacchati divā divassā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, Piṅgiyānī, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Itohaṃ, bho, āgacchāmi samaṇassa gotamassa santikā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m coming, my good man, from the presence of the ascetic Gotama.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññati bhavaṃ piṅgiyānī samaṇassa gotamassa paññāveyyattiyaṃ? Paṇḍito maññe”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think of the ascetic Gotama’s lucidity of wisdom? Do you think he’s astute?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko cāhaṃ, bho, ko ca samaṇassa gotamassa paññāveyyattiyaṃ jānissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“My good man, who am I to judge the ascetic Gotama’s lucidity of wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sopi nūnassa tādisova yo samaṇassa gotamassa paññāveyyattiyaṃ jāneyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’d really have to be on the same level to judge his lucidity of wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Uḷārāya khalu bhavaṃ piṅgiyānī samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ pasaṃsāya pasaṃsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Piṅgiyānī praises the ascetic Gotama with magnificent praise indeed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko cāhaṃ, bho, ko ca samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ pasaṃsissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who am I to praise the ascetic Gotama? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasatthappasatthova so bhavaṃ gotamo seṭṭho devamanussānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is praised by the praised as the best of gods and humans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana bhavaṃ piṅgiyānī atthavasaṃ sampassamāno samaṇe gotame evaṃ abhippasanno”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But for what reason are you so devoted to the ascetic Gotama?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bho, puriso aggarasaparititto na aññesaṃ hīnānaṃ rasānaṃ piheti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suppose a person was completely satisfied by the best tasting food. They wouldn’t be attracted to anything that tasted inferior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bho, yato yato tassa bhoto gotamassa dhammaṃ suṇāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when you hear the ascetic Gotama’s teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi suttaso, yadi geyyaso, yadi veyyākaraṇaso, yadi abbhutadhammaso—</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever it may be, whether statements, songs, discussions, or amazing stories—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tato tato na aññesaṃ puthusamaṇabrāhmaṇappavādānaṃ piheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then you’re not attracted to the doctrines of the various ascetics and brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho, puriso jighacchādubbalyapareto madhupiṇḍikaṃ adhigaccheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a person who was weak with hunger was to obtain a honey-cake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yato yato sāyetha, labhateva sādurasaṃ asecanakaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever they taste it, they would enjoy a sweet, delicious flavor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bho, yato yato tassa bhoto gotamassa dhammaṃ suṇāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when you hear the ascetic Gotama’s teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi suttaso, yadi geyyaso, yadi veyyākaraṇaso, yadi abbhutadhammaso—</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever it may be, whether statements, songs, discussions, or amazing stories—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tato tato labhateva attamanataṃ, labhati cetaso pasādaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then you get a sense of uplift, a confidence of the heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho, puriso candanaghaṭikaṃ adhigaccheyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a person were to obtain a piece of sandalwood, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">haricandanassa vā lohitacandanassa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whether yellow or red. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yato yato ghāyetha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever they smelled it—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi mūlato, yadi majjhato, yadi aggato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">whether at the root, the middle, or the top—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhigacchateva surabhigandhaṃ asecanakaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’d enjoy a delicious fragrance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bho, yato yato tassa bhoto gotamassa dhammaṃ suṇāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when you hear the ascetic Gotama’s teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi suttaso, yadi geyyaso, yadi veyyākaraṇaso, yadi abbhutadhammaso—</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever it may be, whether statements, songs, discussions, or amazing stories—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tato tato adhigacchati pāmojjaṃ adhigacchati somanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then you become filled with joy and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho, puriso ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a person who was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kusalo bhisakko ṭhānaso ābādhaṃ nīhareyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A good doctor would cure them on the spot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bho, yato yato tassa bhoto gotamassa dhammaṃ suṇāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when you hear the ascetic Gotama’s teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi suttaso, yadi geyyaso, yadi veyyākaraṇaso, yadi abbhutadhammaso—</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever it may be, whether statements, songs, discussions, or amazing stories—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tato tato sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā abbhatthaṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then you make an end of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho, pokkharaṇī acchodakā sātodakā sītodakā setakā supatitthā ramaṇīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water, clean, with smooth banks, delightful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha puriso āgaccheyya ghammābhitatto ghammapareto kilanto tasito pipāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ pokkharaṇiṃ ogāhetvā nhātvā ca pivitvā ca sabbadarathakilamathapariḷāhaṃ paṭippassambheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d plunge into the lotus pond to bathe and drink. And all their stress, weariness, and heat exhaustion would die down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bho, yato yato tassa bhoto gotamassa dhammaṃ suṇāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when you hear the ascetic Gotama’s teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi suttaso, yadi geyyaso, yadi veyyākaraṇaso, yadi abbhutadhammaso—</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever it may be, whether statements, songs, discussions, or amazing stories—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tato tato sabbadarathakilamathapariḷāhā paṭippassambhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then all your stress, weariness, and exhaustion die down.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, kāraṇapālī brāhmaṇo uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā dakkhiṇaṃ jāṇumaṇḍalaṃ pathaviyaṃ nihantvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā tikkhattuṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, the brahmin Kāraṇapālī got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and was inspired to exclaim three times: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkantaṃ, bho piṅgiyāni, abhikkantaṃ, bho piṅgiyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, Master Piṅgiyānī! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho piṅgiyāni, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā piṅgiyāninā anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Piṅgiyānī has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ, bho piṅgiyāni, taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṃghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ piṅgiyānī dhāretu, ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Piṅgiyānī remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
