<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.080-80. Catutthaanāgatabhayasutta  - 80. Future Perils (4th) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.080. 80. Catutthaanāgatabhayasutta  - 80. Future Perils (4th) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Yodhājīvavagga  - 8. Warriors </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, anāgatabhayāni etarahi asamuppannāni āyatiṃ samuppajjissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these five future perils have not currently arisen, but they will arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni vo paṭibujjhitabbāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should look out for them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibujjhitvā ca tesaṃ pahānāya vāyamitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and try to give them up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavissanti, bhikkhave, bhikkhū anāgatamaddhānaṃ cīvare kalyāṇakāmā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In a future time there will be mendicants who like nice robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te cīvare kalyāṇakāmā samānā riñcissanti paṃsukūlikattaṃ, riñcissanti araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They will neglect the practice of wearing rag robes and the practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāmanigamarājadhānīsu osaritvā vāsaṃ kappessanti, cīvarahetu ca anekavihitaṃ anesanaṃ appatirūpaṃ āpajjissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital cities and make their homes there. And they will try to get robes in many kinds of wrong and inappropriate ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamaṃ anāgatabhayaṃ etarahi asamuppannaṃ āyatiṃ samuppajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vo paṭibujjhitabbaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibujjhitvā ca tassa pahānāya vāyamitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhavissanti bhikkhū anāgatamaddhānaṃ piṇḍapāte kalyāṇakāmā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who like nice alms-food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te piṇḍapāte kalyāṇakāmā samānā riñcissanti piṇḍapātikattaṃ, riñcissanti araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They will neglect the practice of walking for alms-food and the practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāmanigamarājadhānīsu osaritvā vāsaṃ kappessanti jivhaggena rasaggāni pariyesamānā, piṇḍapātahetu ca anekavihitaṃ anesanaṃ appatirūpaṃ āpajjissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital cities and make their homes there. And they will try to get alms-food in many kinds of wrong and inappropriate ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyaṃ anāgatabhayaṃ etarahi asamuppannaṃ āyatiṃ samuppajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vo paṭibujjhitabbaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibujjhitvā ca tassa pahānāya vāyamitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhavissanti bhikkhū anāgatamaddhānaṃ senāsane kalyāṇakāmā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who like nice lodgings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te senāsane kalyāṇakāmā samānā riñcissanti rukkhamūlikattaṃ, riñcissanti araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They will neglect the practice of staying at the root of a tree and the practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāmanigamarājadhānīsu osaritvā vāsaṃ kappessanti, senāsanahetu ca anekavihitaṃ anesanaṃ appatirūpaṃ āpajjissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital cities and make their homes there. And they will try to get lodgings in many kinds of wrong and inappropriate ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyaṃ anāgatabhayaṃ etarahi asamuppannaṃ āyatiṃ samuppajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vo paṭibujjhitabbaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibujjhitvā ca tassa pahānāya vāyamitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhavissanti bhikkhū anāgatamaddhānaṃ bhikkhunīsikkhamānāsamaṇuddesehi saṃsaṭṭhā viharissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who mix closely with nuns, trainee nuns, and novice nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīsikkhamānāsamaṇuddesehi saṃsagge kho pana, bhikkhave, sati etaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In such conditions, it can be expected that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anabhiratā vā brahmacariyaṃ carissanti, aññataraṃ vā saṅkiliṭṭhaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjissanti, sikkhaṃ vā paccakkhāya hīnāyāvattissanti’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they will live the spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit one of the corrupt offenses, or reject the training and return to a lesser life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhikkhave, catutthaṃ anāgatabhayaṃ etarahi asamuppannaṃ āyatiṃ samuppajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vo paṭibujjhitabbaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibujjhitvā ca tassa pahānāya vāyamitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhavissanti bhikkhū anāgatamaddhānaṃ ārāmikasamaṇuddesehi saṃsaṭṭhā viharissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who mix closely with monastery attendants and novices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmikasamaṇuddesehi saṃsagge kho pana, bhikkhave, sati etaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In such conditions it can be expected that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anekavihitaṃ sannidhikāraparibhogaṃ anuyuttā viharissanti, oḷārikampi nimittaṃ karissanti, pathaviyāpi haritaggepi’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they will engage in storing up goods for their own use, and making obvious hints about digging the earth and cutting plants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamaṃ anāgatabhayaṃ etarahi asamuppannaṃ āyatiṃ samuppajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vo paṭibujjhitabbaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibujjhitvā ca tassa pahānāya vāyamitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca anāgatabhayāni etarahi asamuppannāni āyatiṃ samuppajjissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five future perils that have not currently arisen, but will arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni vo paṭibujjhitabbāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should look out for them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibujjhitvā ca tesaṃ pahānāya vāyamitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and try to give them up.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yodhājīvavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve cetovimuttiphalā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve ca dhammavihārino; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yodhājīvā ca dve vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro ca anāgatāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
