<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.122-122. Satisūpaṭṭhitasutta  - 122. Mindfulness Well Established </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.122. 122. Satisūpaṭṭhitasutta  - 122. Mindfulness Well Established </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gilānavagga  - 13. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vā bhikkhunī vā pañca dhamme bhāveti pañca dhamme bahulīkaroti, tassa dvinnaṃ phalānaṃ aññataraṃ phalaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, any monk or nun who develops and cultivates five qualities can expect one of two results: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enlightenment in the present life, or if there’s something left over, non-return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno ajjhattaññeva sati sūpaṭṭhitā hoti dhammānaṃ udayatthagāminiyā paññāya, asubhānupassī kāye viharati, āhāre paṭikūlasaññī, sabbaloke anabhiratasaññī, sabbasaṅkhāresu aniccānupassī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has well established mindfulness inside themselves in order to understand the arising and passing away of phenomena, meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world, and observes the impermanence of all conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vā bhikkhunī vā ime pañca dhamme bhāveti ime pañca dhamme bahulīkaroti, tassa dvinnaṃ phalānaṃ aññataraṃ phalaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk or nun who develops and cultivates these five qualities can expect one of two results: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enlightenment in the present life, or if there’s something left over, non-return.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
