<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.003-3. Dukkhasutta  - 3. Suffering </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.003. 3. Dukkhasutta  - 3. Suffering </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sekhabalavagga  - 1. Powers of a Trainee </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme dukkhaṃ viharati savighātaṃ saupāyāsaṃ sapariḷāhaṃ, kāyassa ca bhedā paraṃ maraṇā duggati pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a mendicant has five qualities they live unhappily in the present life—with distress, anguish, and fever—and when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu assaddho hoti, ahiriko hoti, anottappī hoti, kusīto hoti, duppañño hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme dukkhaṃ viharati savighātaṃ saupāyāsaṃ sapariḷāhaṃ, kāyassa ca bhedā paraṃ maraṇā duggati pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has these five qualities they live unhappily in the present life—with distress, anguish, and fever—and when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme sukhaṃ viharati avighātaṃ anupāyāsaṃ apariḷāhaṃ, kāyassa ca bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugati pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has five qualities they live happily in the present life—without distress, anguish, or fever—and when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddho hoti, hirīmā hoti, ottappī hoti, āraddhavīriyo hoti, paññavā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and wise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme sukhaṃ viharati avighātaṃ anupāyāsaṃ apariḷāhaṃ, kāyassa ca bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugati pāṭikaṅkhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has these five qualities they live happily in the present life—without distress, anguish, or fever—and when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
