<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.011-11. Ananussutasutta  - 11. Not Learned From Anyone Else </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.011. 11. Ananussutasutta  - 11. Not Learned From Anyone Else </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Balavagga  - 2. Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ananussutesu dhammesu abhiññāvosānapāramippatto paṭijānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I claim to have attained perfection and consummation of insight regarding principles not learned before from another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalāni, yehi balehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has five powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhābalaṃ, hirībalaṃ, ottappabalaṃ, vīriyabalaṃ, paññābalaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca tathāgatassa tathāgatabalāni yehi balehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavattetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
