<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.055-55. Mātāputtasutta  - 55. Mother and Son </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.055. 55. Mātāputtasutta  - 55. Mother and Son </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Nīvaraṇavagga  - 6. Hindrances </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṃ ubho mātāputtā vassāvāsaṃ upagamiṃsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time a mother and son had both entered the rainy season residence at Sāvatthī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu ca bhikkhunī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a monk and a nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te aññamaññassa abhiṇhaṃ dassanakāmā ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They wanted to see each other often. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātāpi puttassa abhiṇhaṃ dassanakāmā ahosi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mother wanted to see her son often, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puttopi mātaraṃ abhiṇhaṃ dassanakāmo ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the son his mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ abhiṇhaṃ dassanā saṃsaggo ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing each other often, they became close. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃsagge sati vissāso ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being so close, they became intimate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vissāse sati otāro ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And being intimate, lust overcame them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te otiṇṇacittā sikkhaṃ apaccakkhāya dubbalyaṃ anāvikatvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭiseviṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With their minds swamped by lust, without rejecting the training and declaring their inability to continue, they had sex. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha, bhante, sāvatthiyaṃ ubho mātāputtā vassāvāsaṃ upagamiṃsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu ca bhikkhunī ca, te aññamaññassa abhiṇhaṃ dassanakāmā ahesuṃ, mātāpi puttassa abhiṇhaṃ dassanakāmā ahosi, puttopi mātaraṃ abhiṇhaṃ dassanakāmo ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ abhiṇhaṃ dassanā saṃsaggo ahosi, saṃsagge sati vissāso ahosi, vissāse sati otāro ahosi, te otiṇṇacittā sikkhaṃ apaccakkhāya dubbalyaṃ anāvikatvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭiseviṃsū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu so, bhikkhave, moghapuriso maññati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, how could that silly man imagine that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na mātā putte sārajjati, putto vā pana mātarī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">a mother cannot lust for her son, or that a son cannot lust for his mother? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekarūpampi samanupassāmi evaṃ rajanīyaṃ evaṃ kamanīyaṃ evaṃ madanīyaṃ evaṃ bandhanīyaṃ evaṃ mucchanīyaṃ evaṃ antarāyakaraṃ anuttarassa yogakkhemassa adhigamāya yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, itthirūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the sight of a woman, I do not see a single sight that is so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, captivating, and infatuating, and such an obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthirūpe, bhikkhave, sattā rattā giddhā gathitā mucchitā ajjhosannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are lustful, greedy, tied, infatuated, and attached to the sight of a woman. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te dīgharattaṃ socanti itthirūpavasānugā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They sorrow for a long time under the sway of a woman’s sight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekasaddampi … ekagandhampi … ekarasampi … ekaphoṭṭhabbampi samanupassāmi evaṃ rajanīyaṃ evaṃ kamanīyaṃ evaṃ madanīyaṃ evaṃ bandhanīyaṃ evaṃ mucchanīyaṃ evaṃ antarāyakaraṃ anuttarassa yogakkhemassa adhigamāya yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, itthiphoṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the sound … smell … taste … touch of a woman, I do not see a single touch that is so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, captivating, and infatuating, and such an obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthiphoṭṭhabbe, bhikkhave, sattā rattā giddhā gathitā mucchitā ajjhosannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are lustful, greedy, tied, infatuated, and attached to the touch of a woman. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te dīgharattaṃ socanti itthiphoṭṭhabbavasānugā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They sorrow for a long time under the sway of a woman’s touch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī, bhikkhave, gacchantīpi purisassa cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a woman walks, she occupies a man’s mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhitāpi … pe … nisinnāpi … sayānāpi … hasantīpi … bhaṇantīpi … gāyantīpi … rodantīpi … ugghātitāpi … matāpi purisassa cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a woman stands … sits … lies down … laughs … speaks … sings … cries … is injured, she occupies a man’s mind. Even when a woman is dead, she occupies a man’s mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi taṃ, bhikkhave, sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For if anyone should be rightly called ‘an all-round snare of Māra’, it’s females. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samantapāso mārassā’ti mātugāmaṃyeva sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samantapāso mārassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sallape asihatthena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You might chat with someone who has knife in hand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pisācenāpi sallape; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You might even chat with a goblin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsīvisampi āsīde, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You might sit close by a viper, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena daṭṭho na jīvati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose bite would take your life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tveva eko ekāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But never should you chat </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātugāmena sallape. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one on one with a female. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muṭṭhassatiṃ tā bandhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They captivate the unmindful </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pekkhitena sitena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with a glance and a smile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athopi dunnivatthena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or scantily clad, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mañjunā bhaṇitena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they speak charming words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neso jano svāsīsado, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not good to sit with such a person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ugghātito mato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">even if she’s injured or dead. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañca kāmaguṇā ete, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five kinds of sensual stimulation </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthirūpasmiṃ dissare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are apparent in a woman’s body: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpā saddā rasā gandhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sights, sounds, tastes, smells, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phoṭṭhabbā ca manoramā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and touches so delightful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ kāmoghavūḷhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those swept away by the flood of sensual pleasures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāme aparijānataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not comprehending them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālaṃ gati bhavābhavaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">prioritize transmigration—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃsārasmiṃ purakkhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">time and destination, and life after life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kāme pariññāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those who completely understand sensual pleasures </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">caranti akutobhayā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">live fearing nothing from any quarter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ve pāraṅgatā loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are those in the world who’ve crossed over, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye pattā āsavakkhayan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having reached the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
