<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.203-203. Assājānīyasutta  - 203. A Thoroughbred </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.203. 203. Assājānīyasutta  - 203. A Thoroughbred </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Kimilavagga  - 21. With Kimbila </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato rañño bhadro assājānīyo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅgantveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with five factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjavena, javena, maddavena, khantiyā, soraccena—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Integrity, speed, gentleness, patience, and sweetness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi aṅgehi samannāgato rañño bhadro assājānīyo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅgantveva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fine royal thoroughbred with these five factors is worthy of a king. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjavena, javena, maddavena, khantiyā, soraccena—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Integrity, speed, gentleness, patience, and sweetness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
