<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.150-150. Dutiyasamayavimuttasutta  - 150. Temporarily Free (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.150. 150. Dutiyasamayavimuttasutta  - 150. Temporarily Free (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">15. Tikaṇḍakīvagga  - 15. At Tikaṇḍakī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhammā samayavimuttassa bhikkhuno parihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammārāmatā, bhassārāmatā, niddārāmatā, indriyesu aguttadvāratā, bhojane amattaññutā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They relish work, talk, and sleep. They don’t guard the sense doors and they eat too much. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhammā samayavimuttassa bhikkhuno parihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhammā samayavimuttassa bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kammārāmatā, na bhassārāmatā, na niddārāmatā, indriyesu guttadvāratā, bhojane mattaññutā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They guard the sense doors and they have moderation in eating. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhammā samayavimuttassa bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tikaṇḍakīvaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Datvā avajānāti ārabhati ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sārandada tikaṇḍa nirayena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mitto asappurisasappurisena, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samayavimuttaṃ apare dveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyo paṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
