<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.235-235. Anukampasutta  - 235. A Compassionate Mendicant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.235. 235. Anukampasutta  - 235. A Compassionate Mendicant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">24. Āvāsikavagga  - 24. A Resident Mendicant </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato āvāsiko bhikkhu gihīnaṃ anukampati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities shows compassion to the lay people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhisīle samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They encourage them in higher ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammadassane niveseti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They equip them to see the truth of the teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānake upasaṅkamitvā satiṃ uppādeti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they are sick, they go to them and prompt their mindfulness, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘arahaggataṃ āyasmanto satiṃ upaṭṭhāpethā’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Establish your mindfulness, good sirs, in what is worthy.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahā kho pana bhikkhusaṃgho abhikkanto nānāverajjakā bhikkhū gihīnaṃ upasaṅkamitvā āroceti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from abroad, they go to the lay people and announce: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mahā kho, āvuso, bhikkhusaṃgho abhikkanto nānāverajjakā bhikkhū, karotha puññāni, samayo puññāni kātun’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from abroad. Make merit! Now is the time to make merit!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kho panassa bhojanaṃ denti lūkhaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā taṃ attanā paribhuñjati, saddhādeyyaṃ na vinipāteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they eat whatever food they give them, coarse or fine, not wasting a gift given in faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato āvāsiko bhikkhu gihīnaṃ anukampatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A resident mendicant with these five qualities shows compassion to the lay people.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
