<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.175-175. Caṇḍālasutta  - 175. Outcaste </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.175. 175. Caṇḍālasutta  - 175. Outcaste </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">18. Upāsakavagga  - 18. A Lay Follower </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato upāsako upāsakacaṇḍālo ca hoti upāsakamalañca upāsakapatikuṭṭho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a lay follower with five qualities is an outcaste, a stain, and a reject among lay followers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddho hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re faithless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dussīlo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re unethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kotūhalamaṅgaliko hoti, maṅgalaṃ pacceti no kammaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They practice noisy, superstitious rites, believing in omens rather than deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ito ca bahiddhā dakkhiṇeyyaṃ gavesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of religious donations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha ca pubbakāraṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they make offerings there first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato upāsako upāsakacaṇḍālo ca hoti upāsakamalañca upāsakapatikuṭṭho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lay follower with these five qualities is an outcaste, a stain, and a reject among lay followers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato upāsako upāsakaratanañca hoti upāsakapadumañca upāsakapuṇḍarīkañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lay follower with five qualities is a gem, a pink lotus, and a white lotus among lay followers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddho hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re faithful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlavā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re ethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akotūhalamaṅgaliko hoti, kammaṃ pacceti no maṅgalaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t practice noisy, superstitious rites, and believe in deeds rather than omens. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ito bahiddhā dakkhiṇeyyaṃ gavesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of religious donations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idha ca pubbakāraṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they don’t make offerings there first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato upāsako upāsakaratanañca hoti upāsakapadumañca upāsakapuṇḍarīkañcā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lay follower with these five qualities is a gem, a pink lotus, and a white lotus among lay followers.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
