<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.210-210. Muṭṭhassatisutta  - 210. Unmindful </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.210. 210. Muṭṭhassatisutta  - 210. Unmindful </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">21. Kimilavagga  - 21. With Kimbila </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā muṭṭhassatissa asampajānassa niddaṃ okkamayato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of falling asleep unmindful and unaware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhaṃ supati, dukkhaṃ paṭibujjhati, pāpakaṃ supinaṃ passati, devatā na rakkhanti, asuci muccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You sleep badly and wake miserably. You have bad dreams. The deities don’t protect you. And you emit semen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ādīnavā muṭṭhassatissa asampajānassa niddaṃ okkamayato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five drawbacks of falling asleep unmindful and unaware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, ānisaṃsā upaṭṭhitassatissa sampajānassa niddaṃ okkamayato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five benefits of falling asleep mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhaṃ supati, sukhaṃ paṭibujjhati, na pāpakaṃ supinaṃ passati, devatā rakkhanti, asuci na muccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You sleep well and wake happily. You don’t have bad dreams. The deities protect you. And you don’t emit semen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā upaṭṭhitassatissa sampajānassa niddaṃ okkamayato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five benefits of falling asleep mindful and aware.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kimilavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kimilo dhammassavanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ājānīyo balaṃ khilaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vinibandhaṃ yāgu kaṭṭhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gītaṃ muṭṭhassatinā cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
