<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.216-216. Dutiyaakkhantisutta  - 216. Intolerance (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.216. 216. Dutiyaakkhantisutta  - 216. Intolerance (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">22. Akkosakavagga  - 22. Abuse </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā akkhantiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of intolerance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuno janassa appiyo hoti amanāpo, luddo ca hoti, vippaṭisārī ca, sammūḷho kālaṃ karoti, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Most people find you unlikable and unlovable. You’re cruel and remorseful. You feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up, after death, you’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ādīnavā akkhantiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five drawbacks to intolerance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, ānisaṃsā khantiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five benefits of tolerance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuno janassa piyo hoti manāpo, aluddo ca hoti, avippaṭisārī ca, asammūḷho kālaṃ karoti, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Most people find you likable and lovable. You’re neither cruel nor remorseful. You don’t feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up, after death, you’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā khantiyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five benefits of tolerance.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
