<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.041-41. Ādiyasutta  - 41. Getting Rich </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.041. 41. Ādiyasutta  - 41. Getting Rich </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Muṇḍarājavagga  - 5. With King Muṇḍa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pañcime, gahapati, bhogānaṃ ādiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, there are these five reasons to get rich. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi attānaṃ sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, with his legitimate wealth—earned by his efforts and initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow—he makes himself happy and pleased, keeping himself properly happy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāpitaro sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He makes his mother and father happy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puttadāradāsakammakaraporise sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He makes his children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff happy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ paṭhamo bhogānaṃ ādiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first reason to get rich. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi mittāmacce sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he makes his friends and colleagues happy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ dutiyo bhogānaṃ ādiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second reason to get rich. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi yā tā honti āpadā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he protects himself against losses from such things as fire, water, kings, bandits, or unloved heirs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aggito vā udakato vā rājato vā corato vā appiyato vā dāyādato—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathārūpāsu āpadāsu bhogehi pariyodhāya vattati, sotthiṃ attānaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He keeps himself safe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ tatiyo bhogānaṃ ādiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third reason to get rich. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi pañcabaliṃ kattā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he makes five spirit-offerings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātibaliṃ, atithibaliṃ, pubbapetabaliṃ, rājabaliṃ, devatābaliṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">to relatives, guests, ancestors, king, and deities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ catuttho bhogānaṃ ādiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth reason to get rich. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, gahapati, ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalaparicitehi sedāvakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammaladdhehi ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā madappamādā paṭiviratā khantisoracce niviṭṭhā ekamattānaṃ damenti ekamattānaṃ samenti ekamattānaṃ parinibbāpenti, tathārūpesu samaṇabrāhmaṇesu uddhaggikaṃ dakkhiṇaṃ patiṭṭhāpeti sovaggikaṃ sukhavipākaṃ saggasaṃvattanikaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he establishes an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins—those who avoid intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and gentleness, and who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves—that’s conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ pañcamo bhogānaṃ ādiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth reason to get rich. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, gahapati, pañca bhogānaṃ ādiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five reasons to get rich. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ce, gahapati, ariyasāvakassa ime pañca bhogānaṃ ādiye ādiyato bhogā parikkhayaṃ gacchanti, tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now if the riches a noble disciple gets for these five reasons run out, he thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye vata bhogānaṃ ādiyā te cāhaṃ ādiyāmi bhogā ca me parikkhayaṃ gacchantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘So, the riches I have obtained for these reasons are running out.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itissa hoti avippaṭisāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so he has no regrets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa ce, gahapati, ariyasāvakassa ime pañca bhogānaṃ ādiye ādiyato bhogā abhivaḍḍhanti, tassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if the riches a noble disciple gets for these five reasons increase, he thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye vata bhogānaṃ ādiyā te cāhaṃ ādiyāmi bhogā ca me abhivaḍḍhantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘So, the riches I have obtained for these reasons are increasing.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itissa hoti ubhayeneva avippaṭisāroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so he has no regrets in both cases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhuttā bhogā bhatā bhaccā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve enjoyed my wealth, supporting those who depend on me; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitiṇṇā āpadāsu me; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve overcome losses; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaggā dakkhiṇā dinnā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve given uplifting religious donations; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho pañcabalīkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and made the five spirit-offerings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upaṭṭhitā sīlavanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have looked after the ethical and </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññatā brahmacārayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">disciplined spiritual practitioners. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadatthaṃ bhogaṃ iccheyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve achieved the purpose </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṇḍito gharamāvasaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for which an astute lay person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So me attho anuppatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">wishes to gain wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kataṃ ananutāpiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t regret what I’ve done.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ anussaraṃ macco, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mortal person who recollects this </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ariyadhamme ṭhito naro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">stands firm in the teaching of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idheva naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re praised in this life by the astute, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pecca sagge pamodatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they depart to rejoice in heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
