<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.227-227. Bhogasutta  - 227. Riches </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.227. 227. Bhogasutta  - 227. Riches </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">23. Dīghacārikavagga  - 23. Long Wandering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā bhogesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of riches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggisādhāraṇā bhogā, udakasādhāraṇā bhogā, rājasādhāraṇā bhogā, corasādhāraṇā bhogā, appiyehi dāyādehi sādhāraṇā bhogā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fire, water, kings, thieves, and unloved heirs all take a share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ādīnavā bhogesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five drawbacks of riches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, ānisaṃsā bhogesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these five benefits of riches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhoge nissāya attānaṃ sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati, mātāpitaro sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati, puttadāradāsakammakaraporise sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati, mittāmacce sukheti pīṇeti sammā sukhaṃ pariharati, samaṇabrāhmaṇesu uddhaggikaṃ dakkhiṇaṃ patiṭṭhāpeti sovaggikaṃ sukhavipākaṃ saggasaṃvattanikaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Riches enable you to bring pleasure and joy to yourself; your mother and father; your children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff; and your friends and colleagues; and to keep them all happy. And they enable you to establish an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that’s conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā bhogesū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five benefits of riches.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
