<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.125-125. Paṭhamaanāyussāsutta  - 125. Longevity (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.125. 125. Paṭhamaanāyussāsutta  - 125. Longevity (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gilānavagga  - 13. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhammā anāyussā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these five things impede longevity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asappāyakārī hoti, sappāye mattaṃ na jānāti, apariṇatabhojī ca hoti, akālacārī ca hoti, abrahmacārī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Doing what is unsuitable, not knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food unfit for consumption, activity at unsuitable times, and unchastity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhammā anāyussā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five things that impede longevity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhammā āyussā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things promote longevity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāyakārī hoti, sappāye mattaṃ jānāti, pariṇatabhojī ca hoti, kālacārī ca hoti, brahmacārī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Doing what is suitable, knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food fit for consumption, activity at suitable times, and celibacy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhammā āyussā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five things that promote longevity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
