<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.156-156. Tatiyasaddhammasammosasutta  - 156. The Decline of the True Teaching (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.156. 156. Tatiyasaddhammasammosasutta  - 156. The Decline of the True Teaching (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">16. Saddhammavagga  - 16. The True Teaching </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhammā saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhū duggahitaṃ suttantaṃ pariyāpuṇanti dunnikkhittehi padabyañjanehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when the mendicants memorize discourses that they learned incorrectly, with misplaced words and phrases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dunnikkhittassa, bhikkhave, padabyañjanassa atthopi dunnayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the words and phrases are misplaced, the meaning is misinterpreted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū dubbacā honti, dovacassakaraṇehi dhammehi samannāgatā, akkhamā appadakkhiṇaggāhino anusāsaniṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants are hard to admonish, having qualities that make them hard to admonish. They’re impatient, and don’t take instruction respectfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ye te bhikkhū bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā, te na sakkaccaṃ suttantaṃ paraṃ vācenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned—knowledgeable in the scriptures, who have memorized the teachings, the texts on monastic training, and the outlines—don’t carefully make others recite the discourses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṃ accayena chinnamūlako suttanto hoti appaṭisaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they pass away, the discourses are cut off at the root, with no-one to preserve them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, therā bhikkhū bāhulikā honti sāthalikā okkamane pubbaṅgamā paviveke nikkhittadhurā, na vīriyaṃ ārabhanti appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ pacchimā janatā diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who come after them follow their example. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāpi hoti bāhulikā sāthalikā okkamane pubbaṅgamā paviveke nikkhittadhurā, na vīriyaṃ ārabhati appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They too are indulgent and slack … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃgho bhinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, there’s a schism in the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃghe kho pana, bhikkhave, bhinne aññamaññaṃ akkosā ca honti, aññamaññaṃ paribhāsā ca honti, aññamaññaṃ parikkhepā ca honti, aññamaññaṃ pariccajanā ca honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Saṅgha is split, they abuse, insult, block, and reject each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha appasannā ceva nappasīdanti, pasannānañca ekaccānaṃ aññathattaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This doesn’t inspire confidence in those without it, and it causes some with confidence to change their minds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamo dhammo saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhammā saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, bhikkhave, dhammā saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhū suggahitaṃ suttantaṃ pariyāpuṇanti sunikkhittehi padabyañjanehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when the mendicants memorize discourses that have been learned correctly, with well placed words and phrases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sunikkhittassa, bhikkhave, padabyañjanassa atthopi sunayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the words and phrases are well organized, the meaning is correctly interpreted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū suvacā honti sovacassakaraṇehi dhammehi samannāgatā, khamā padakkhiṇaggāhino anusāsaniṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants are easy to admonish, having qualities that make them easy to admonish. They’re patient, and take instruction respectfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, ye te bhikkhū bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā, te sakkaccaṃ suttantaṃ paraṃ vācenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned—knowledgeable in the scriptures, who have memorized the teachings, the texts on monastic training, and the outlines—carefully make others recite the discourses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṃ accayena na chinnamūlako suttanto hoti sappaṭisaraṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they pass away, the discourses aren’t cut off at the root, and they have someone to preserve them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, therā bhikkhū na bāhulikā honti na sāthalikā, okkamane nikkhittadhurā paviveke pubbaṅgamā; vīriyaṃ ārabhanti appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the senior mendicants are not indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion. They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ pacchimā janatā diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who come after them follow their example. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāpi hoti na bāhulikā na sāthalikā, okkamane nikkhittadhurā paviveke pubbaṅgamā, vīriyaṃ ārabhati appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They too are not indulgent or slack … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, saṅgho samaggo sammodamāno avivadamāno ekuddeso phāsuṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Saṅgha lives comfortably, in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, with one recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe kho pana, bhikkhave, samagge na ceva aññamaññaṃ akkosā honti, na ca aññamaññaṃ paribhāsā honti, na ca aññamaññaṃ parikkhepā honti, na ca aññamaññaṃ pariccajanā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Saṅgha is in harmony, they don’t abuse, insult, block, or reject each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha appasannā ceva pasīdanti, pasannānañca bhiyyobhāvo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This inspires confidence in those without it, and increases confidence in those who have it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamo dhammo saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca dhammā saddhammassa ṭhitiyā asammosāya anantaradhānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
