<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.170-170. Bhaddajisutta  - 170. With Bhaddaji </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.170. 170. Bhaddajisutta  - 170. With Bhaddaji </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">17. Āghātavagga  - 17. Resentment </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ānando kosambiyaṃ viharati ghositārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā bhaddaji yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā ānandena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Bhaddaji went up to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ bhaddajiṃ āyasmā ānando etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, and Venerable Ānanda said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu kho, āvuso bhaddaji, dassanānaṃ aggaṃ, kiṃ savanānaṃ aggaṃ, kiṃ sukhānaṃ aggaṃ, kiṃ saññānaṃ aggaṃ, kiṃ bhavānaṃ aggan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Bhaddaji, what is the best sight, the best sound, the best happiness, the best perception, and the best state of existence?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthāvuso, brahmā abhibhū anabhibhūto aññadatthudaso vasavattī, yo taṃ brahmānaṃ passati, idaṃ dassanānaṃ aggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, there is this Brahmā, the undefeated, the champion, the universal seer, the wielder of power. When you see Brahmā, that’s the best sight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthāvuso, ābhassarā nāma devā sukhena abhisannā parisannā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are the gods called ‘of streaming radiance’, who are drenched and steeped in pleasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te kadāci karahaci udānaṃ udānenti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Every so often they feel inspired to exclaim: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho sukhaṃ, aho sukhan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Oh, what bliss! Oh, what bliss!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo taṃ saddaṃ suṇāti, idaṃ savanānaṃ aggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you hear that, it’s the best sound. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthāvuso, subhakiṇhā nāma devā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are the gods called ‘replete with glory’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te santaṃyeva tusitā sukhaṃ paṭivedenti, idaṃ sukhānaṃ aggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since they’re truly content, they experience pleasure. This is the best happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthāvuso, ākiñcaññāyatanūpagā devā, idaṃ saññānaṃ aggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are the gods reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the best perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthāvuso, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanūpagā devā, idaṃ bhavānaṃ aggan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are the gods reborn in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the best state of existence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sameti kho idaṃ āyasmato bhaddajissa, yadidaṃ bahunā janenā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, Venerable Bhaddaji, do you agree with what most people say about this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āyasmā kho ānando bahussuto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, Venerable Ānanda, you’re very learned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭibhātu āyasmantaṃyeva ānandan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t you clarify this yourself?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tenahāvuso bhaddaji, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Reverend Bhaddaji, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho āyasmā bhaddaji āyasmato ānandassa paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” Bhaddaji replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ānando etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā passato kho, āvuso, anantarā āsavānaṃ khayo hoti, idaṃ dassanānaṃ aggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What you see when the defilements end in the present life is the best sight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā suṇato anantarā āsavānaṃ khayo hoti, idaṃ savanānaṃ aggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What you hear when the defilements end in the present life is the best sound. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā sukhitassa anantarā āsavānaṃ khayo hoti, idaṃ sukhānaṃ aggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The happiness you feel when the defilements end in the present life is the best happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā saññissa anantarā āsavānaṃ khayo hoti, idaṃ saññānaṃ aggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What you perceive when the defilements end in the present life is the best perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā bhūtassa anantarā āsavānaṃ khayo hoti, idaṃ bhavānaṃ aggan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The state of existence in which the defilements end in the present life is the best state of existence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āghātavaggo dutiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve āghātavinayā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sākacchā sājīvato pañhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pucchā nirodho codanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlaṃ nisanti bhaddajīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
