<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.127-127. Vapakāsasutta  - 127. Living Apart </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.127. 127. Vapakāsasutta  - 127. Living Apart </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Gilānavagga  - 13. Sick </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nālaṃ saṃghamhā vapakāsituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is not fit to live apart from a Saṅgha community. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu asantuṭṭho hoti itarītarena cīvarena, asantuṭṭho hoti itarītarena piṇḍapātena, asantuṭṭho hoti itarītarena senāsanena, asantuṭṭho hoti itarītarena gilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena, kāmasaṅkappabahulo ca viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is not content with any kind of robe, alms-food, lodging, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they have a lot of sensual thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nālaṃ saṃghamhā vapakāsituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these five qualities is not fit to live apart from a Saṅgha community. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu alaṃ saṃghamhā vapakāsituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with five qualities is fit to live apart from a Saṅgha community. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena cīvarena, santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena piṇḍapātena, santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena senāsanena, santuṭṭho hoti itarītarena gilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena, nekkhammasaṅkappabahulo ca viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is content with any kind of robe, alms-food, lodging, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they think a lot about renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu alaṃ saṃghamhā vapakāsitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to live apart from a Saṅgha community.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
