<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn060-Apaṇṇakasutta  - Guaranteed </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Apaṇṇakasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">Guaranteed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 60  - Middle Discourses 60 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu cārikaṃ caramāno mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ yena sālā nāma kosalānaṃ brāhmaṇagāmo tadavasari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Sālā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṃ kho sāleyyakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“samaṇo khalu bho gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito kosalesu cārikaṃ caramāno mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ sālaṃ anuppatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho pana bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ lokaṃ sadevakaṃ samārakaṃ sabrahmakaṃ sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiṃ pajaṃ sadevamanussaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho pana tathārūpānaṃ arahataṃ dassanaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good to see such perfected ones.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sāleyyakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā appekacce bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Appekacce bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu; sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Appekacce yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Appekacce bhagavato santike nāmagottaṃ sāvetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Appekacce tuṇhībhūtā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinne kho sāleyyake brāhmaṇagahapatike bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. The Buddha said to them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthi pana vo, gahapatayo, koci manāpo satthā yasmiṃ vo ākāravatī saddhā paṭiladdhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, householders, is there some other teacher you’re happy with, in whom you have acquired grounded faith?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthi kho no, bhante, koci manāpo satthā yasmiṃ no ākāravatī saddhā paṭiladdhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Manāpaṃ vo, gahapatayo, satthāraṃ alabhantehi ayaṃ apaṇṇako dhammo samādāya vattitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since you haven’t found a teacher you’re happy with, you should undertake and implement this guaranteed teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaṇṇako hi, gahapatayo, dhammo samatto samādinno, so vo bhavissati dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For when the guaranteed teaching is undertaken, it will be for your lasting welfare and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, gahapatayo, apaṇṇako dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the guaranteed teaching? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, gahapatayo, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi dinnaṃ, natthi yiṭṭhaṃ, natthi hutaṃ; natthi sukatadukkaṭānaṃ kammānaṃ phalaṃ vipāko, natthi ayaṃ loko, natthi paro loko; natthi mātā, natthi pitā; natthi sattā opapātikā; natthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammaggatā sammā paṭipannā ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no obligation to mother and father. No beings are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is well attained and practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃyeva kho, gahapatayo, samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā ujuvipaccanīkavādā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi dinnaṃ, atthi yiṭṭhaṃ, atthi hutaṃ; atthi sukatadukkaṭānaṃ kammānaṃ phalaṃ vipāko; atthi ayaṃ loko, atthi paro loko; atthi mātā, atthi pitā; atthi sattā opapātikā; atthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammaggatā sammā paṭipannā ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There is obligation to mother and father. There are beings reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are well attained and practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, gahapatayo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, householders? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nanume samaṇabrāhmaṇā aññamaññassa ujuvipaccanīkavādā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tatra, gahapatayo, ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi dinnaṃ, natthi yiṭṭhaṃ … pe … ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti </span></p>
<p class="p3">there’s no meaning in giving, etc. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesametaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—yamidaṃ kāyasucaritaṃ, vacīsucaritaṃ, manosucaritaṃ—ime tayo kusale dhamme abhinivajjetvā yamidaṃ kāyaduccaritaṃ, vacīduccaritaṃ, manoduccaritaṃ—ime tayo akusale dhamme samādāya vattissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can expect that they will reject good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā passanti akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ādīnavaṃ okāraṃ saṃkilesaṃ, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ nekkhamme ānisaṃsaṃ vodānapakkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘natthi paro loko’ tissa diṭṭhi hoti; sāssa hoti micchādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there is no other world is wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘natthi paro loko’ti saṅkappeti; svāssa hoti micchāsaṅkappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is another world, their thought that there is no other world is wrong thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘natthi paro loko’ti vācaṃ bhāsati; sāssa hoti micchāvācā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is another world, their speech that there is no other world is wrong speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘natthi paro loko’ti āha; ye te arahanto paralokaviduno tesamayaṃ paccanīkaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is another world, in saying that there is no other world they contradict those perfected ones who know the other world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘natthi paro loko’ti paraṃ saññāpeti; sāssa hoti asaddhammasaññatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is another world, in convincing another that there is no other world they are convincing them to accept an untrue teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya ca pana asaddhammasaññattiyā attānukkaṃseti, paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti pubbeva kho panassa susīlyaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, dussīlyaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca micchādiṭṭhi micchāsaṅkappo micchāvācā ariyānaṃ paccanīkatā asaddhammasaññatti attukkaṃsanā paravambhanā. Evamassime aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti micchādiṭṭhipaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that is how wrong view gives rise to these many bad, unskillful qualities—wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, convincing others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, gahapatayo, viññū puriso iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace kho natthi paro loko evamayaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo kāyassa bhedā sotthimattānaṃ karissati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If there is no other world, when this individual’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace kho atthi paro loko, evamayaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if there is another world, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaṃ kho pana māhu paro loko, hotu nesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But let’s assume that those who say that there is no other world are correct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca panāyaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ gārayho—dussīlo purisapuggalo micchādiṭṭhi natthikavādo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in the present life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, a nihilist.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho attheva paro loko, evaṃ imassa bhoto purisapuggalassa ubhayattha kaliggaho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But if there really is another world, they lose on both counts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ gārayho, yañca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For they are criticized by sensible people in the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamassāyaṃ apaṇṇako dhammo dussamatto samādinno, ekaṃsaṃ pharitvā tiṭṭhati, riñcati kusalaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have wrongly undertaken this guaranteed teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, gahapatayo, ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi dinnaṃ … pe … ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti </span></p>
<p class="p3">there is meaning in giving, etc. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesametaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—yamidaṃ kāyaduccaritaṃ, vacīduccaritaṃ, manoduccaritaṃ—ime tayo akusale dhamme abhinivajjetvā yamidaṃ kāyasucaritaṃ, vacīsucaritaṃ, manosucaritaṃ—ime tayo kusale dhamme samādāya vattissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can expect that they will reject bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passanti hi te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ādīnavaṃ okāraṃ saṅkilesaṃ, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ nekkhamme ānisaṃsaṃ vodānapakkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘atthi paro loko’ tissa diṭṭhi hoti; sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there is another world is right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘atthi paro loko’ti saṅkappeti; svāssa hoti sammāsaṅkappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is another world, their thought that there is another world is right thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘atthi paro loko’ti vācaṃ bhāsati; sāssa hoti sammāvācā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is another world, their speech that there is another world is right speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘atthi paro loko’ti āha; ye te arahanto paralokaviduno tesamayaṃ na paccanīkaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is another world, in saying that there is another world they don’t contradict those perfected ones who know the other world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana paraṃ lokaṃ ‘atthi paro loko’ti paraṃ saññāpeti; sāssa hoti saddhammasaññatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is another world, in convincing another that there is another world they are convincing them to accept a true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya ca pana saddhammasaññattiyā nevattānukkaṃseti, na paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti pubbeva kho panassa dussīlyaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, susīlyaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca sammādiṭṭhi sammāsaṅkappo sammāvācā ariyānaṃ apaccanīkatā saddhammasaññatti anattukkaṃsanā aparavambhanā. Evamassime aneke kusalā dhammā sambhavanti sammādiṭṭhipaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that is how right view gives rise to these many skillful qualities—right view, right thought, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, convincing others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, gahapatayo, viññū puriso iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace kho atthi paro loko, evamayaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If there is another world, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaṃ kho pana māhu paro loko, hotu nesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But let’s assume that those who say that there is no other world are correct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca panāyaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ pāsaṃso—sīlavā purisapuggalo sammādiṭṭhi atthikavādo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in the present life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms a positive teaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho attheva paro loko, evaṃ imassa bhoto purisapuggalassa ubhayattha kaṭaggaho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So if there really is another world, they win on both counts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ pāsaṃso, yañca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For they are praised by sensible people in the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamassāyaṃ apaṇṇako dhammo susamatto samādinno ubhayaṃsaṃ pharitvā tiṭṭhati, riñcati akusalaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have rightly undertaken this guaranteed teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, gahapatayo, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘karoto kārayato, chindato chedāpayato, pacato pācāpayato, socayato socāpayato, kilamato kilamāpayato, phandato phandāpayato, pāṇamatipātayato, adinnaṃ ādiyato, sandhiṃ chindato, nillopaṃ harato, ekāgārikaṃ karoto, paripanthe tiṭṭhato, paradāraṃ gacchato, musā bhaṇato; karoto na karīyati pāpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. They do nothing wrong when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khurapariyantena cepi cakkena yo imissā pathaviyā pāṇe ekaṃ maṃsakhalaṃ ekaṃ maṃsapuñjaṃ kareyya, natthi tatonidānaṃ pāpaṃ, natthi pāpassa āgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dakkhiṇañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṃ gaccheyya hananto ghātento, chindanto chedāpento, pacanto pācento; natthi tatonidānaṃ pāpaṃ, natthi pāpassa āgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttarañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṃ gaccheyya dadanto dāpento, yajanto yajāpento; natthi tatonidānaṃ puññaṃ, natthi puññassa āgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, no merit comes of that, and no outcome of merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dānena damena saṃyamena saccavajjena natthi puññaṃ, natthi puññassa āgamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is no merit or outcome of merit.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃyeva kho, gahapatayo, samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā ujuvipaccanīkavādā te evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘karoto kārayato, chindato chedāpayato, pacato pācāpayato, socayato socāpayato, kilamato kilamāpayato, phandato phandāpayato, pāṇamatipātayato, adinnaṃ ādiyato, sandhiṃ chindato, nillopaṃ harato, ekāgārikaṃ karoto, paripanthe tiṭṭhato, paradāraṃ gacchato, musā bhaṇato; karoto karīyati pāpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. They do a bad deed when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khurapariyantena cepi cakkena yo imissā pathaviyā pāṇe ekaṃ maṃsakhalaṃ ekaṃ maṃsapuñjaṃ kareyya, atthi tatonidānaṃ pāpaṃ, atthi pāpassa āgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dakkhiṇañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṃ gaccheyya hananto ghātento, chindanto chedāpento, pacanto pācento; atthi tatonidānaṃ pāpaṃ, atthi pāpassa āgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttarañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṃ gaccheyya dadanto dāpento, yajanto yajāpento; atthi tatonidānaṃ puññaṃ, atthi puññassa āgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, merit comes of that, and an outcome of merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dānena damena saṃyamena saccavajjena atthi puññaṃ, atthi puññassa āgamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is merit and outcome of merit.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, gahapatayo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, householders? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nanume samaṇabrāhmaṇā aññamaññassa ujuvipaccanīkavādā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tatra, gahapatayo, ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘karoto kārayato, chindato chedāpayato, pacato pācāpayato, socayato socāpayato, kilamato kilamāpayato, phandato phandāpayato, pāṇamatipātayato, adinnaṃ ādiyato, sandhiṃ chindato, nillopaṃ harato, ekāgārikaṃ karoto, paripanthe tiṭṭhato, paradāraṃ gacchato, musā bhaṇato; karoto na karīyati pāpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, etc. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khurapariyantena cepi cakkena yo imissā pathaviyā pāṇe ekaṃ maṃsakhalaṃ ekaṃ maṃsapuñjaṃ kareyya, natthi tatonidānaṃ pāpaṃ, natthi pāpassa āgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dakkhiṇañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṃ gaccheyya hananto ghātento … pe … dānena damena saṃyamena saccavajjena natthi puññaṃ, natthi puññassa āgamo’ti </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesametaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—yamidaṃ kāyasucaritaṃ, vacīsucaritaṃ, manosucaritaṃ—ime tayo kusale dhamme abhinivajjetvā yamidaṃ kāyaduccaritaṃ, vacīduccaritaṃ, manoduccaritaṃ—ime tayo akusale dhamme samādāya vattissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can expect that they will reject good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā passanti akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ādīnavaṃ okāraṃ saṅkilesaṃ, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ nekkhamme ānisaṃsaṃ vodānapakkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘natthi kiriyā’ tissa diṭṭhi hoti; sāssa hoti micchādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that action is ineffective is wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘natthi kiriyā’ti saṅkappeti; svāssa hoti micchāsaṅkappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since action actually does have an effect, their thought that action is ineffective is wrong thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘natthi kiriyā’ti vācaṃ bhāsati; sāssa hoti micchāvācā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since action actually does have an effect, their speech that action is ineffective is wrong speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘natthi kiriyā’ti āha, ye te arahanto kiriyavādā tesamayaṃ paccanīkaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since action actually does have an effect, in saying that action is ineffective they contradict those perfected ones who teach that action is effective. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘natthi kiriyā’ti paraṃ saññāpeti; sāssa hoti asaddhammasaññatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since action actually does have an effect, in convincing another that action is ineffective they are convincing them to accept an untrue teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya ca pana asaddhammasaññattiyā attānukkaṃseti, paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti pubbeva kho panassa susīlyaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, dussīlyaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca micchādiṭṭhi micchāsaṅkappo micchāvācā ariyānaṃ paccanīkatā asaddhammasaññatti attukkaṃsanā paravambhanā. Evamassime aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti micchādiṭṭhipaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that is how wrong view gives rise to these many bad, unskillful qualities—wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, convincing others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, gahapatayo, viññū puriso iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace kho natthi kiriyā, evamayaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo kāyassa bhedā sotthimattānaṃ karissati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If there is no effective action, when this individual’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace kho atthi kiriyā evamayaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if there is effective action, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaṃ kho pana māhu kiriyā, hotu nesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But let’s assume that those who say that there is no effective action are correct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca panāyaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ gārayho—dussīlo purisapuggalo micchādiṭṭhi akiriyavādo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in the present life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, one who denies the efficacy of action.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho attheva kiriyā, evaṃ imassa bhoto purisapuggalassa ubhayattha kaliggaho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But if there really is effective action, they lose on both counts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ gārayho, yañca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For they are criticized by sensible people in the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamassāyaṃ apaṇṇako dhammo dussamatto samādinno, ekaṃsaṃ pharitvā tiṭṭhati, riñcati kusalaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have wrongly undertaken this guaranteed teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, gahapatayo, ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘karoto kārayato, chindato chedāpayato, pacato pācāpayato, socayato socāpayato, kilamato kilamāpayato, phandato phandāpayato, pāṇamatipātayato, adinnaṃ ādiyato, sandhiṃ chindato, nillopaṃ harato, ekāgārikaṃ karoto, paripanthe tiṭṭhato, paradāraṃ gacchato, musā bhaṇato; karoto karīyati pāpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, etc. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khurapariyantena cepi cakkena yo imissā pathaviyā pāṇe ekaṃ maṃsakhalaṃ ekaṃ maṃsapuñjaṃ kareyya, atthi tatonidānaṃ pāpaṃ, atthi pāpassa āgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dakkhiṇañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṃ gaccheyya hananto ghātento, chindanto chedāpento, pacanto pācento, atthi tatonidānaṃ pāpaṃ, atthi pāpassa āgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttarañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṃ gaccheyya dadanto dāpento, yajanto yajāpento, atthi tatonidānaṃ puññaṃ, atthi puññassa āgamo. Dānena damena saṃyamena saccavajjena atthi puññaṃ, atthi puññassa āgamo’ti </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesametaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ yamidaṃ kāyaduccaritaṃ, vacīduccaritaṃ, manoduccaritaṃ—ime tayo akusale dhamme abhinivajjetvā yamidaṃ kāyasucaritaṃ, vacīsucaritaṃ, manosucaritaṃ—ime tayo kusale dhamme samādāya vattissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can expect that they will reject bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passanti hi te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ādīnavaṃ okāraṃ saṅkilesaṃ, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ nekkhamme ānisaṃsaṃ vodānapakkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘atthi kiriyā’ tissa diṭṭhi hoti; sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that action is effective is right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘atthi kiriyā’ti saṅkappeti; svāssa hoti sammāsaṅkappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since action actually does have an effect, their thought that action is effective is right thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘atthi kiriyā’ti vācaṃ bhāsati; sāssa hoti sammāvācā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since action actually does have an effect, their speech that action is effective is right speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘atthi kiriyā’ti āha; ye te arahanto kiriyavādā tesamayaṃ na paccanīkaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since action actually does have an effect, in saying that action is effective they don’t contradict those perfected ones who teach that action is effective. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana kiriyaṃ ‘atthi kiriyā’ti paraṃ saññāpeti; sāssa hoti saddhammasaññatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since action actually does have an effect, in convincing another that action is effective they are convincing them to accept a true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya ca pana saddhammasaññattiyā nevattānukkaṃseti, na paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti pubbeva kho panassa dussīlyaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, susīlyaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca sammādiṭṭhi sammāsaṅkappo sammāvācā ariyānaṃ apaccanīkatā saddhammasaññatti anattukkaṃsanā aparavambhanā. Evamassime aneke kusalā dhammā sambhavanti sammādiṭṭhipaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that is how right view gives rise to these many skillful qualities—right view, right thought, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, convincing others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, gahapatayo, viññū puriso iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace kho atthi kiriyā, evamayaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If there is effective action, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaṃ kho pana māhu kiriyā, hotu nesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But let’s assume that those who say that there is no effective action are correct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca panāyaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ pāsaṃso—sīlavā purisapuggalo sammādiṭṭhi kiriyavādo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in the present life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms the efficacy of action.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho attheva kiriyā, evaṃ imassa bhoto purisapuggalassa ubhayattha kaṭaggaho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So if there really is effective action, they win on both counts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ pāsaṃso, yañca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For they are praised by sensible people in the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamassāyaṃ apaṇṇako dhammo susamatto samādinno, ubhayaṃsaṃ pharitvā tiṭṭhati, riñcati akusalaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have rightly undertaken this guaranteed teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, gahapatayo, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi hetu, natthi paccayo sattānaṃ saṃkilesāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is no cause or condition for the corruption of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahetū appaccayā sattā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are corrupted without cause or reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi hetu, natthi paccayo sattānaṃ visuddhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s no cause or condition for the purification of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahetū appaccayā sattā visujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi balaṃ, natthi vīriyaṃ, natthi purisathāmo, natthi purisaparakkamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no power, no energy, no manly strength or vigor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbe sattā sabbe pāṇā sabbe bhūtā sabbe jīvā avasā abalā avīriyā niyatisaṃgatibhāvapariṇatā chasvevābhijātīsu sukhadukkhaṃ paṭisaṃvedentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All sentient beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy. Molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃyeva kho, gahapatayo, samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā ujuvipaccanīkavādā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi hetu, atthi paccayo sattānaṃ saṃkilesāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is a cause and condition for the corruption of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sahetū sappaccayā sattā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi hetu, atthi paccayo sattānaṃ visuddhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a cause and condition for the purification of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sahetū sappaccayā sattā visujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings are purified with cause and reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi balaṃ, atthi vīriyaṃ, atthi purisathāmo, atthi purisaparakkamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is power, energy, manly strength and vigor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sabbe sattā sabbe pāṇā sabbe bhūtā sabbe jīvā avasā abalā avīriyā niyatisaṃgatibhāvapariṇatā chasvevābhijātīsu sukhadukkhaṃ paṭisaṃvedentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is not the case that all sentient beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy, or that, molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, gahapatayo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, householders? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nanume samaṇabrāhmaṇā aññamaññassa ujuvipaccanīkavādā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tatra, gahapatayo, ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi hetu, natthi paccayo sattānaṃ saṅkilesāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">there’s no cause or condition for the corruption of sentient beings, etc. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahetū appaccayā sattā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi hetu, natthi paccayo sattānaṃ visuddhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahetū appaccayā sattā visujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi balaṃ, natthi vīriyaṃ, natthi purisathāmo, natthi purisaparakkamo; sabbe sattā sabbe pāṇā sabbe bhūtā sabbe jīvā avasā abalā avīriyā niyatisaṅgatibhāvapariṇatā chasvevābhijātīsu sukhadukkhaṃ paṭisaṃvedentī’ti </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesametaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—yamidaṃ kāyasucaritaṃ, vacīsucaritaṃ, manosucaritaṃ—ime tayo kusale dhamme abhinivajjetvā yamidaṃ kāyaduccaritaṃ, vacīduccaritaṃ, manoduccaritaṃ—ime tayo akusale dhamme samādāya vattissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can expect that they will reject good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā passanti akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ādīnavaṃ okāraṃ saṅkilesaṃ, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ nekkhamme ānisaṃsaṃ vodānapakkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘natthi hetū’ tissa diṭṭhi hoti; sāssa hoti micchādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Moreover, since there actually is causality, their view that there is no causality is wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘natthi hetū’ti saṅkappeti; svāssa hoti micchāsaṅkappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is causality, their thought that there is no causality is wrong thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘natthi hetū’ti vācaṃ bhāsati; sāssa hoti micchāvācā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is causality, their speech that there is no causality is wrong speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘natthi hetū’ti āha; ye te arahanto hetuvādā tesamayaṃ paccanīkaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is causality, in saying that there is no causality they contradict those perfected ones who teach that there is causality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘natthi hetū’ti paraṃ saññāpeti; sāssa hoti asaddhammasaññatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is causality, in convincing another that there is no causality they are convincing them to accept an untrue teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya ca pana asaddhammasaññattiyā attānukkaṃseti, paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti pubbeva kho panassa susīlyaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, dussīlyaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca micchādiṭṭhi micchāsaṅkappo micchāvācā ariyānaṃ paccanīkatā asaddhammasaññatti attānukkaṃsanā paravambhanā. Evamassime aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti micchādiṭṭhipaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that is how wrong view gives rise to these many bad, unskillful qualities—wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, convincing others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, gahapatayo, viññū puriso iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace kho natthi hetu, evamayaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sotthimattānaṃ karissati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If there is no causality, when this individual’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace kho atthi hetu, evamayaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And if there is causality, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaṃ kho pana māhu hetu, hotu nesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But let’s assume that those who say that there is no causality are correct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca panāyaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ gārayho—dussīlo purisapuggalo micchādiṭṭhi ahetukavādo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in the present life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, one who denies causality.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho attheva hetu, evaṃ imassa bhoto purisapuggalassa ubhayattha kaliggaho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But if there really is causality, they lose on both counts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ gārayho, yañca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For they are criticized by sensible people in the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamassāyaṃ apaṇṇako dhammo dussamatto samādinno, ekaṃsaṃ pharitvā tiṭṭhati, riñcati kusalaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have wrongly undertaken this guaranteed teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, gahapatayo, ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi hetu, atthi paccayo sattānaṃ saṅkilesāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">there is a cause and condition for the corruption of sentient beings, etc. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sahetū sappaccayā sattā saṅkilissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi hetu, atthi paccayo sattānaṃ visuddhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sahetū sappaccayā sattā visujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi balaṃ, atthi vīriyaṃ, atthi purisathāmo, atthi purisaparakkamo; na sabbe sattā sabbe pāṇā sabbe bhūtā sabbe jīvā avasā abalā avīriyā niyatisaṅgatibhāvapariṇatā chasvevābhijātīsu sukhadukkhaṃ paṭisaṃvedentī’ti </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesametaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ—yamidaṃ kāyaduccaritaṃ, vacīduccaritaṃ, manoduccaritaṃ—ime tayo akusale dhamme abhinivajjetvā yamidaṃ kāyasucaritaṃ, vacīsucaritaṃ, manosucaritaṃ—ime tayo kusale dhamme samādāya vattissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can expect that they will reject bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passanti hi te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ādīnavaṃ okāraṃ saṅkilesaṃ, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ nekkhamme ānisaṃsaṃ vodānapakkhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘atthi hetū’ tissa diṭṭhi hoti; sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Moreover, since there actually is causality, their view that there is causality is right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘atthi hetū’ti saṅkappeti; svāssa hoti sammāsaṅkappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is causality, their thought that there is causality is right thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘atthi hetū’ti vācaṃ bhāsati; sāssa hoti sammāvācā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is causality, their speech that there is causality is right speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘atthi hetū’ti āha, ye te arahanto hetuvādā tesamayaṃ na paccanīkaṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is causality, in saying that there is causality they don’t contradict those perfected ones who teach that there is causality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaṃyeva kho pana hetuṃ ‘atthi hetū’ti paraṃ saññāpeti; sāssa hoti saddhammasaññatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since there actually is causality, in convincing another that there is causality they are convincing them to accept a true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya ca pana saddhammasaññattiyā nevattānukkaṃseti, na paraṃ vambheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti pubbeva kho panassa dussīlyaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, susīlyaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca sammādiṭṭhi sammāsaṅkappo sammāvācā ariyānaṃ apaccanīkatā saddhammasaññatti anattukkaṃsanā aparavambhanā. Evamassime aneke kusalā dhammā sambhavanti sammādiṭṭhipaccayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that is how right view gives rise to these many skillful qualities—right view, right thought, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, convincing others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, gahapatayo, viññū puriso iti paṭisañcikkhati: ‘sace kho atthi hetu, evamayaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: ‘If there is causality, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaṃ kho pana māhu hetu, hotu nesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But let’s assume that those who say that there is no causality are correct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca panāyaṃ bhavaṃ purisapuggalo diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ pāsaṃso—sīlavā purisapuggalo sammādiṭṭhi hetuvādo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in the present life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms causality.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho atthi hetu, evaṃ imassa bhoto purisapuggalassa ubhayattha kaṭaggaho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So if there really is causality, they win on both counts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca diṭṭheva dhamme viññūnaṃ pāsaṃso, yañca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For they are praised by sensible people in the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamassāyaṃ apaṇṇako dhammo susamatto samādinno, ubhayaṃsaṃ pharitvā tiṭṭhati, riñcati akusalaṃ ṭhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have rightly undertaken this guaranteed teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, gahapatayo, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi sabbaso āruppā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are no totally formless states of meditation.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃyeva kho, gahapatayo, samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā ujuvipaccanīkavādā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi sabbaso āruppā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are totally formless states of meditation.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, gahapatayo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, householders? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nanume samaṇabrāhmaṇā aññamaññassa ujuvipaccanīkavādā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tatra, gahapatayo, viññū puriso iti paṭisañcikkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye kho te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Some ascetics and brahmins say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi sabbaso āruppā’ti, idaṃ me adiṭṭhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">there are no totally formless meditations, but I have not seen that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yepi te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some ascetics and brahmins say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi sabbaso āruppā’ti, idaṃ me aviditaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">there are totally formless meditations, but I have not known that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana ajānanto apassanto ekaṃsena ādāya vohareyyaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without knowing or seeing, it would not be appropriate for me to take one side and declare, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idameva saccaṃ, moghamaññanti, na metaṃ assa patirūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the only truth, other ideas are silly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kho te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If those ascetics and brahmins who say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi sabbaso āruppā’ti, sace tesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ, ṭhānametaṃ vijjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are no totally formless meditations are correct, it is possible </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye te devā rūpino manomayā, apaṇṇakaṃ me tatrūpapatti bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I will be guaranteed rebirth among the gods who possess form and made of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye pana te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If those ascetics and brahmins who say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi sabbaso āruppā’ti, sace tesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ, ṭhānametaṃ vijjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are totally formless meditations are correct, it is possible </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye te devā arūpino saññāmayā, apaṇṇakaṃ me tatrūpapatti bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I will be guaranteed rebirth among the gods who are formless and made of perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dissanti kho pana rūpādhikaraṇaṃ daṇḍādānasatthādānakalahaviggahavivādatuvaṃtuvaṃpesuññamusāvādā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, owing to form, bad things are seen: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and fights, accusations, divisive speech, and lies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Natthi kho panetaṃ sabbaso arūpe’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those things don’t exist where it is totally formless.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya rūpānaṃyeva nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding forms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, gahapatayo, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi sabbaso bhavanirodho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is no such thing as the total cessation of future lives.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃyeva kho, gahapatayo, samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā ujuvipaccanīkavādā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi sabbaso bhavanirodho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is such a thing as the total cessation of future lives.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, gahapatayo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, householders? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nanume samaṇabrāhmaṇā aññamaññassa ujuvipaccanīkavādā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tatra, gahapatayo, viññū puriso iti paṭisañcikkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye kho te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Some ascetics and brahmins say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi sabbaso bhavanirodho’ti, idaṃ me adiṭṭhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">there is no such thing as the total cessation of future lives, but I have not seen that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yepi te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some ascetics and brahmins say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi sabbaso bhavanirodho’ti, idaṃ me aviditaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">there is such a thing as the total cessation of future lives, but I have not known that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana ajānanto apassanto ekaṃsena ādāya vohareyyaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without knowing or seeing, it would not be appropriate for me to take one side and declare, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idameva saccaṃ, moghamaññanti, na metaṃ assa patirūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‚This is the only truth, other ideas are silly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kho te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If those ascetics and brahmins who say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi sabbaso bhavanirodho’ti, sace tesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ, ṭhānametaṃ vijjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is no such thing as the total cessation of future lives are correct, it is possible </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye te devā arūpino saññāmayā apaṇṇakaṃ me tatrūpapatti bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I will be guaranteed rebirth among the gods who are formless and made of perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye pana te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If those ascetics and brahmins who say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi sabbaso bhavanirodho’ti, sace tesaṃ bhavataṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ saccaṃ vacanaṃ, ṭhānametaṃ vijjati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is such a thing as the total cessation of future lives are correct, it is possible </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I will be extinguished in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kho te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The view of those ascetics and brahmins who say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi sabbaso bhavanirodho’ti, tesamayaṃ diṭṭhi sārāgāya santike, saṃyogāya santike, abhinandanāya santike, ajjhosānāya santike, upādānāya santike. </span></p>
<p class="p3">there is no such thing as the total cessation of future lives is close to greed, approving, attachment, and grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye pana te bhonto samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The view of those ascetics and brahmins who say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi sabbaso bhavanirodho’ti, tesamayaṃ diṭṭhi asārāgāya santike, asaṃyogāya santike, anabhinandanāya santike, anajjhosānāya santike, anupādānāya santiketi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">there is such a thing as the total cessation of future lives is close to non-greed, non-approving, non-attachment, and non-grasping.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iti paṭisaṅkhāya bhavānaṃyeva nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, they simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārome, gahapatayo, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Householders, these four people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapatayo, ekacco puggalo attantapo hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapatayo, ekacco puggalo parantapo hoti paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapatayo, ekacco puggalo attantapo ca hoti attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person mortifies themselves and others, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapatayo, ekacco puggalo nevattantapo hoti nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One person doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so anattantapo aparantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live without wishes in the present life, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, gahapatayo, puggalo attantapo attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapatayo, ekacco puggalo acelako hoti muttācāro hatthāpalekhano … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone goes naked, ignoring conventions. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti evarūpaṃ anekavihitaṃ kāyassa ātāpanaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so they live committed to practicing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, gahapatayo, puggalo attantapo attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who mortifies themselves, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, gahapatayo, puggalo parantapo paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what person mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapatayo, ekacco puggalo orabbhiko hoti sūkariko … pe … ye vā panaññepi keci kurūrakammantā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is a butcher of sheep, pigs, poultry, or deer, a hunter or fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a butcher of cattle, a jailer, or has some other cruel livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, gahapatayo, puggalo parantapo paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who mortifies others, being committed to the practice of mortifying others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, gahapatayo, puggalo attantapo ca attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what person mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapatayo, ekacco puggalo rājā vā hoti khattiyo muddhāvasitto … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a person is an anointed king or a well-to-do brahmin. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tepi daṇḍatajjitā bhayatajjitā assumukhā rudamānā parikammāni karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His bondservants, servants, and workers do their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping, with tearful faces. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, gahapatayo, puggalo attantapo ca attaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto parantapo ca paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, gahapatayo, puggalo nevattantapo nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what person doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so anattantapo aparantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">living without wishes in the present life, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, gahapatayo, tathāgato loke uppajjati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder hears that teaching, or a householder’s child, or someone reborn in some good family. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ime pañca nīvaraṇe pahāya cetaso upakkilese paññāya dubbalīkaraṇe </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">second absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">third absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte pubbenivāsānussatiñāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo … pe … iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte sattānaṃ cutūpapātañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe, sugate duggate … pe … yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. … They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte āsavānaṃ khayañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ āsavanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ jānato evaṃ passato kāmāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, bhavāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, avijjāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, gahapatayo, puggalo nevattantapo nāttaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto na parantapo na paraparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a person who neither mortifies themselves or others, being committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so anattantapo aparantapo diṭṭheva dhamme nicchāto nibbuto sītībhūto sukhappaṭisaṃvedī brahmabhūtena attanā viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live without wishes in the present life, extinguished, cooled, experiencing bliss, having become holy in themselves.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, sāleyyakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Sālā said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho gotama, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā gotamena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete mayaṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāma dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">We go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsake no bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gate”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaṇṇakasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapativaggo niṭṭhito paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kandaranāgarasekhavato ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Potaliyo puna jīvakabhacco; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upālidamatho kukkuraabhayo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuvedanīyāpaṇṇakato dasamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
