<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn068-Naḷakapānasutta  - At Naḷakapāna </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Naḷakapānasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">At Naḷakapāna </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 68  - Middle Discourses 68 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu viharati naḷakapāne palāsavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans near Naḷakapāna in the Parrot Tree grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā abhiññātā abhiññātā kulaputtā bhagavantaṃ uddissa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā honti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time several very well-known gentlemen had gone forth from the lay life to homelessness out of faith in the Buddha—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmā ca anuruddho, āyasmā ca bhaddiyo, āyasmā ca kimilo, āyasmā ca bhagu, āyasmā ca koṇḍañño, āyasmā ca revato, āyasmā ca ānando, aññe ca abhiññātā abhiññātā kulaputtā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The venerables Anuruddha, Bhaddiya, Kimbila, Bhagu, Koṇḍañña, Revata, Ānanda, and other very well-known gentlemen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā bhikkhusaṃghaparivuto abbhokāse nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was sitting in the open, surrounded by the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā te kulaputte ārabbha bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha spoke to the mendicants about those gentlemen: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ye te, bhikkhave, kulaputtā mamaṃ uddissa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, kacci te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū abhiratā brahmacariye”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, those gentlemen who have gone forth from the lay life to homelessness out of faith in me—I trust they’re satisfied with the spiritual life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, the mendicants kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā te kulaputte ārabbha bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second and a third time the Buddha asked the same question. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ye te, bhikkhave, kulaputtā mamaṃ uddissa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, kacci te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū abhiratā brahmacariye”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho bhagavā te kulaputte ārabbha bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ye te, bhikkhave, kulaputtā mamaṃ uddissa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, kacci te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū abhiratā brahmacariye”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a third time, the mendicants kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yannūnāhaṃ te kulaputte puccheyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why don’t I question just those gentlemen?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Venerable Anuruddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci tumhe, anuruddhā, abhiratā brahmacariye”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Anuruddha and friends, I hope you’re satisfied with the spiritual life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha mayaṃ, bhante, abhiratā brahmacariye”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, sir, we are satisfied with the spiritual life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, anuruddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ kho, anuruddhā, tumhākaṃ patirūpaṃ kulaputtānaṃ saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitānaṃ yaṃ tumhe abhirameyyātha brahmacariye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate for gentlemen like yourselves, who have gone forth in faith from the lay life to homelessness, to be satisfied with the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena tumhe, anuruddhā, bhadrena yobbanena samannāgatā paṭhamena vayasā susukāḷakesā kāme paribhuñjeyyātha tena tumhe, anuruddhā, bhadrenapi yobbanena samannāgatā paṭhamena vayasā susukāḷakesā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since you’re blessed with youth, in the prime of life, black-haired, you could have enjoyed sensual pleasures; yet you have gone forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca kho pana tumhe, anuruddhā, neva rājābhinītā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, na corābhinītā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, na iṇaṭṭā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, na bhayaṭṭā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, nājīvikāpakatā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But you didn’t go forth because you were forced to by kings or bandits, or because you’re in debt or threatened, or to earn a living. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca khomhi otiṇṇo jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, didn’t you go forth thinking: ‘I’m swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I’m swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Hopefully I can find an end to this entire mass of suffering’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nanu tumhe, anuruddhā, evaṃ saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ pabbajitena ca pana, anuruddhā, kulaputtena kimassa karaṇīyaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But, Anuruddha and friends, when a gentleman has gone forth like this, what should they do? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivekaṃ, anuruddhā, kāmehi vivekaṃ akusalehi dhammehi pītisukhaṃ nādhigacchati aññaṃ vā tato santataraṃ, tassa abhijjhāpi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, byāpādopi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, thinamiddhampi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati uddhaccakukkuccampi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, vicikicchāpi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, aratīpi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, tandīpi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take someone who doesn’t achieve the rapture and bliss that are secluded from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities, or something even more peaceful than that. Their mind is still occupied by desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, doubt, discontent, and sloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivekaṃ, anuruddhā, kāmehi vivekaṃ akusalehi dhammehi pītisukhaṃ nādhigacchati aññaṃ vā tato santataraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s someone who doesn’t achieve the rapture and bliss that are secluded from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities, or something even more peaceful than that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivekaṃ, anuruddhā, kāmehi vivekaṃ akusalehi dhammehi pītisukhaṃ adhigacchati aññaṃ vā tato santataraṃ, tassa abhijjhāpi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, byāpādopi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, thinamiddhampi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, uddhaccakukkuccampi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, vicikicchāpi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, aratīpi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, tandīpi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take someone who does achieve the rapture and bliss that are secluded from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities, or something even more peaceful than that. Their mind is not occupied by desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, doubt, discontent, and sloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivekaṃ, anuruddhā, kāmehi vivekaṃ akusalehi dhammehi pītisukhaṃ adhigacchati aññaṃ vā tato santataraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s someone who does achieve the rapture and bliss that are secluded from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities, or something even more peaceful than that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kinti vo, anuruddhā, mayi hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is this what you think of me? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye āsavā saṃkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, appahīnā te tathāgatassa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Realized One has not given up the defilements, the corruptions that lead to future lives and are hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā tathāgato saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodetī’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why, after reflection, he uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho no, bhante, bhagavati evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No sir, we don’t think of you that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye āsavā saṅkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, appahīnā te tathāgatassa; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā tathāgato saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodetī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho no, bhante, bhagavati hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">We think of you this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye āsavā saṅkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, pahīnā te tathāgatassa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Realized One has given up the defilements, the corruptions that lead to future lives and are hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā tathāgato saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodetī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why, after reflection, he uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, anuruddhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa, anuruddhā, ye āsavā saṅkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, pahīnā te ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has given up the defilements, the corruptions that lead to future lives and are hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. He has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, anuruddhā, tālo matthakacchinno abhabbo punavirūḷhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a palm tree with its crown cut off is incapable of further growth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, anuruddhā, tathāgatassa ye āsavā saṅkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, pahīnā te ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way, the Realized One has given up the defilements so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā tathāgato saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why, after reflection, he uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, anuruddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Anuruddha and friends? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṃ atthavasaṃ sampassamāno tathāgato sāvake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">What advantage does the Realized One see in declaring the rebirth of his disciples who have passed away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asu amutra upapanno; asu amutra upapanno’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This one is reborn here, while that one is reborn there’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṃnettikā bhagavaṃpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu vata, bhante, bhagavantaṃyeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, anuruddhā, tathāgato janakuhanatthaṃ na janalapanatthaṃ na lābhasakkārasilokānisaṃsatthaṃ na ‘iti maṃ jano jānātū’ti sāvake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Realized One does not declare such things for the sake of deceiving people or flattering them, nor for the benefit of possessions, honor, or popularity, nor thinking, ‘So let people know about me!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi ca kho, anuruddhā, kulaputtā saddhā uḷāravedā uḷārapāmojjā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, there are gentlemen of faith who are full of sublime joy and gladness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ sutvā tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear that, they apply their minds to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ taṃ, anuruddhā, hoti dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is for their lasting welfare and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhu suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a monk who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmo bhikkhu kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The monk named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhagavatā byākato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāya saṇṭhahī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he was enlightened.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he’s either seen for himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃpañño so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃvihārī so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that monk’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuno phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a monk lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhu suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a monk who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmo bhikkhu kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The monk named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhagavatā byākato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko tattha parinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of the five lower fetters, he’s been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he’s either seen for himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo … pe … evaṃpañño … evaṃvihārī … evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that monk’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuno phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a monk lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhu suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a monk who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmo bhikkhu kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The monk named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhagavatā byākato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmī sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, he’s a once-returner. He’ll come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he’s either seen for himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo … pe … evaṃpañño … evaṃvihārī … evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that monk’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuno phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a monk lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhu suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a monk who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmo bhikkhu kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The monk named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhagavatā byākato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of three fetters he’s a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he’s either seen for himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo … pe … evaṃpañño … evaṃvihārī … evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that monk’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuno phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a monk lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhunī suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a nun who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmā bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The nun named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā bhagavatā byākatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāya saṇṭhahī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">she was enlightened.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s either seen for herself, or heard from someone else, that that sister </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃpaññā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃvihārinī sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that nun’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuniyā phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a nun lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhunī suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a nun who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmā bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The nun named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā bhagavatā byākatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyinī anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of the five lower fetters, she’s been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s either seen for herself, or heard from someone else, that that sister </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā … pe … evaṃpaññā … evaṃvihārinī … evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that nun’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuniyā phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a nun lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhunī suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a nun who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmā bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The nun named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā bhagavatā byākatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāminī sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, she’s a once-returner. She’ll come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s either seen for herself, or heard from someone else, that that sister </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā … pe … evaṃpaññā … evaṃvihārinī … evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that nun’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuniyā phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a nun lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhunī suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a nun who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmā bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The nun named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā bhagavatā byākatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of three fetters she’s a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s either seen for herself, or heard from someone else, that that sister </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā … evaṃpaññā … evaṃvihārinī … evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that nun’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuniyā phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a nun lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, upāsako suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a layman who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmo upāsako kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The layman named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhagavatā byākato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko tattha parinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of the five lower fetters, he’s been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he’s either seen for himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃpañño so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃvihārī so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa saddhañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that layman’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsakassa phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a layman lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, upāsako suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a layman who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmo upāsako kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The layman named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhagavatā byākato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmī sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, he’s a once-returner. He’ll come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he’s either seen for himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo … evaṃpañño … evaṃvihārī … evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that layman’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsakassa phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a layman lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, upāsako suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a layman who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmo upāsako kālaṅkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The layman named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhagavatā byākato—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of three fetters he’s a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he’s either seen for himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo … evaṃpañño … evaṃvihārī … evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that layman’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā upāsakassa phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a layman lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, upāsikā suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a laywoman who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmā upāsikā kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The laywoman named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā bhagavatā byākatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyinī anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of the five lower fetters, she’s been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s either seen for herself, or heard from someone else, that that sister </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā … evaṃpaññā … evaṃvihārinī … evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that laywoman’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsikāya phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a laywoman lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, upāsikā suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a laywoman who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmā upāsikā kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The laywoman named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā bhagavatā byākatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāminī sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, she’s a once-returner. She’ll come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s either seen for herself, or heard from someone else, that that sister </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā … evaṃpaññā … evaṃvihārinī … evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that laywoman’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsikāya phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a laywoman lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānuruddhā, upāsikā suṇāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take a laywoman who hears this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itthannāmā upāsikā kālaṅkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The laywoman named so-and-so has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā bhagavatā byākatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has declared that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the ending of three fetters she’s a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she’s either seen for herself, or heard from someone else, that that sister </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃpaññā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃvihārinī sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Recollecting that laywoman’s faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsikāya phāsuvihāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That too is how a laywoman lives at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, anuruddhā, tathāgato na janakuhanatthaṃ na janalapanatthaṃ na lābhasakkārasilokānisaṃsatthaṃ na ‘iti maṃ jano jānātū’ti sāvake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So it’s not for the sake of deceiving people or flattering them, nor for the benefit of possessions, honor, or popularity, nor thinking, ‘So let people know about me!’ that the Realized One declares the rebirth of his disciples who have passed away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This one is reborn here, while that one is reborn there.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi ca kho, anuruddhā, kulaputtā saddhā uḷāravedā uḷārapāmojjā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, there are gentlemen of faith who are full of joy and gladness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṃ sutvā tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear that, they apply their minds to that end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ taṃ, anuruddhā, hoti dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is for their lasting welfare and happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamano āyasmā anuruddho bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, Venerable Anuruddha and friends were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naḷakapānasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
