<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn069-Goliyānisutta  - With Gulissāni </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Goliyānisutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">With Gulissāni </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 69  - Middle Discourses 69 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena goliyāni nāma bhikkhu āraññiko padasamācāro saṃghamajjhe osaṭo hoti kenacideva karaṇīyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a wilderness mendicant of lax behavior named Gulissāni had come down to the midst of the Saṅgha on some business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho āyasmā sāriputto goliyāniṃ bhikkhuṃ ārabbha bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There Venerable Sāriputta spoke to the mendicants about Gulissāni: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena sabrahmacārīsu sagāravena bhavitabbaṃ sappatissena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should have respect and reverence for his spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu saṃghagato saṃghe viharanto sabrahmacārīsu agāravo hoti appatisso, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena, yo ayamāyasmā sabrahmacārīsu agāravo hoti appatisso’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he has no respect and reverence for his spiritual companions?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena sabrahmacārīsu sagāravena bhavitabbaṃ sappatissena. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should have respect and reverence for his spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena āsanakusalena bhavitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be careful where he sits, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iti there ca bhikkhū nānupakhajja nisīdissāmi nave ca bhikkhū na āsanena paṭibāhissāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I shall sit so that I don’t intrude on the senior monks and I don’t block the junior monks from a seat.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu saṃghagato saṃghe viharanto na āsanakusalo hoti, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena, yo ayamāyasmā āsanakusalo na hotī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s not careful where he sits?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena āsanakusalena bhavitabbaṃ. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be careful where he sits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena ābhisamācārikopi dhammo jānitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should know even the supplementary regulations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu saṃghagato saṃghe viharanto ābhisamācārikampi dhammaṃ na jānāti, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā ābhisamācārikampi dhammaṃ na jānātī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he doesn’t even know the supplementary regulations?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena ābhisamācārikopi dhammo jānitabbo. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should know even the supplementary regulations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena nātikālena gāmo pavisitabbo nātidivā paṭikkamitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t enter the village too early or return too late in the day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu saṃghagato saṃghe viharanto atikālena gāmaṃ pavisati atidivā paṭikkamati, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does so, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā atikālena gāmaṃ pavisati atidivā paṭikkamatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he enters the village too early or returns too late in the day?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena nātikālena gāmo pavisitabbo, nātidivā paṭikkamitabbaṃ. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t enter the village too early or return too late in the day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā saṅghagatena saṅghe viharantena na purebhattaṃ pacchābhattaṃ kulesu cārittaṃ āpajjitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t socialize with families before or after the meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu saṅghagato saṅghe viharanto purebhattaṃ pacchābhattaṃ kulesu cārittaṃ āpajjati, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does so, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ayaṃ nūnimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena viharato vikālacariyā bahulīkatā, tamenaṃ saṅghagatampi samudācaratī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This wilderness venerable, staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, must be used to wandering about at the wrong time, since he behaves like this when he’s come to the Saṅgha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā saṅghagatena saṅghe viharantena na purebhattaṃ pacchābhattaṃ kulesu cārittaṃ āpajjitabbaṃ. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t socialize with families before or after the meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā saṅghagatena saṅghe viharantena anuddhatena bhavitabbaṃ acapalena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t be restless and fickle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu saṅghagato saṅghe viharanto uddhato hoti capalo, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idaṃ nūnimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena viharato uddhaccaṃ cāpalyaṃ bahulīkataṃ, tamenaṃ saṅghagatampi samudācaratī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This wilderness venerable, staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, must be used to being restless and fickle, since he behaves like this when he’s come to the Saṅgha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā saṅghagatena saṅghe viharantena anuddhatena bhavitabbaṃ acapalena. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t be restless and fickle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā saṅghagatena saṅghe viharantena amukharena bhavitabbaṃ avikiṇṇavācena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t be gossipy and loose-tongued. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu saṅghagato saṅghe viharanto mukharo hoti vikiṇṇavāco, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā mukharo vikiṇṇavāco’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s gossipy and loose-tongued?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā saṅghagatena saṅghe viharantena amukharena bhavitabbaṃ avikiṇṇavācena. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t be gossipy and loose-tongued. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena suvacena bhavitabbaṃ kalyāṇamittena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be easy to admonish, with good friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu saṃghagato saṃghe viharanto dubbaco hoti pāpamitto, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he’s hard to admonish, with bad friends, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā dubbaco pāpamitto’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s hard to admonish, with bad friends?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā saṃghagatena saṃghe viharantena suvacena bhavitabbaṃ kalyāṇamittena. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be easy to admonish, with good friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā indriyesu guttadvārena bhavitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should guard the sense doors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu indriyesu aguttadvāro hoti, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā indriyesu aguttadvāro’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he doesn’t guard the sense doors?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā indriyesu guttadvārena bhavitabbaṃ. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should guard the sense doors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā bhojane mattaññunā bhavitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should eat in moderation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu bhojane amattaññū hoti, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā bhojane amattaññū’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he eats too much?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā bhojane mattaññunā bhavitabbaṃ. (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should eat in moderation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā jāgariyaṃ anuyuttena bhavitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should be committed to wakefulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu jāgariyaṃ ananuyutto hoti, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he isn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā jāgariyaṃ ananuyutto’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s not committed to wakefulness?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā jāgariyaṃ anuyuttena bhavitabbaṃ. (11) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should be committed to wakefulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā āraddhavīriyena bhavitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should be energetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu kusīto hoti, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he isn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā kusīto’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s not energetic?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā āraddhavīriyena bhavitabbaṃ. (12) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should be energetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā upaṭṭhitassatinā bhavitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should be mindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu muṭṭhassatī hoti, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he isn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā muṭṭhassatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s not mindful?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā upaṭṭhitassatinā bhavitabbaṃ. (13) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should be mindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā samāhitena bhavitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should have immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu asamāhito hoti, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā asamāhito’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he doesn’t have immersion?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā samāhitena bhavitabbaṃ. (14) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should have immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā paññavatā bhavitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should be wise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu duppañño hoti, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he isn’t, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā duppañño’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s not wise?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā paññavatā bhavitabbaṃ. (15) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should be wise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā abhidhamme abhivinaye yogo karaṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should make an effort to learn the teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santāvuso, āraññikaṃ bhikkhuṃ abhidhamme abhivinaye pañhaṃ pucchitāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are those who will question a wilderness monk about the teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu abhidhamme abhivinaye pañhaṃ puṭṭho na sampāyati, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he fails to answer, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā abhidhamme abhivinaye pañhaṃ puṭṭho na sampāyatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he can’t answer a question about the teaching and training?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā abhidhamme abhivinaye yogo karaṇīyo. (16) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should make an effort to learn the teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā ye te santā vimokkhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā tattha yogo karaṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should practice meditation to realize the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santāvuso, āraññikaṃ bhikkhuṃ ye te santā vimokkhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā tattha pañhaṃ pucchitāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are those who will question a wilderness monk regarding the formless liberations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu ye te santā vimokkhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā tattha pañhaṃ puṭṭho na sampāyati, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he fails to answer, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā ye te santā vimokkhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā tattha pañhaṃ puṭṭho na sampāyatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he can’t answer a question about the formless liberations?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā ye te santā vimokkhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā tattha yogo karaṇīyo. (17) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should practice meditation to realize the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraññikenāvuso, bhikkhunā uttari manussadhamme yogo karaṇīyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wilderness monk should practice meditation to realize the superhuman state. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santāvuso, āraññikaṃ bhikkhuṃ uttari manussadhamme pañhaṃ pucchitāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are those who will question a wilderness monk about the superhuman state. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace, āvuso, āraññiko bhikkhu uttari manussadhamme pañhaṃ puṭṭho na sampāyati, tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he fails to answer, there’ll be some who say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kiṃ panimassāyasmato āraññikassa ekassāraññe serivihārena yo ayamāyasmā yassatthāya pabbajito tamatthaṃ na jānātī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he doesn’t know the goal for which he went forth?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa bhavanti vattāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āraññikena bhikkhunā uttari manussadhamme yogo karaṇīyo”ti. (18) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why a wilderness monk should practice meditation to realize the superhuman state.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā mahāmoggallāno āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When Venerable Sāriputta said this, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āraññikeneva nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhunā ime dhammā samādāya vattitabbā udāhu gāmantavihārināpī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, should these things be undertaken and followed only by wilderness monks, or by those who live in the neighborhood of a village as well?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āraññikenāpi kho, āvuso moggallāna, bhikkhunā ime dhammā samādāya vattitabbā pageva gāmantavihārinā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Moggallāna, these things should be undertaken and followed by wilderness monks, and still more by those who live in the neighborhood of a village.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Goliyānisuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
