<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn071-Tevijjavacchasutta  - To Vacchagotta on the Three Knowledges </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Tevijjavacchasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">To Vacchagotta on the Three Knowledges </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 71  - Middle Discourses 71 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena vacchagotto paribbājako ekapuṇḍarīke paribbājakārāme paṭivasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the wanderer Vacchagotta was residing in the Single Lotus Monastery of the wanderers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya vesāliṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atippago kho tāva vesāliyaṃ piṇḍāya carituṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s too early to wander for alms in Vesālī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yannūnāhaṃ yena ekapuṇḍarīko paribbājakārāmo yena vacchagotto paribbājako tenupasaṅkameyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I visit the wanderer Vacchagotta at the Single Lotus Monastery?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā yena ekapuṇḍarīko paribbājakārāmo yena vacchagotto paribbājako tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that’s what he did. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho vacchagotto paribbājako bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Vacchagotta saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etu kho, bhante, bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Blessed One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svāgataṃ, bhante, bhagavato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Welcome, Blessed One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cirassaṃ kho, bhante, bhagavā imaṃ pariyāyamakāsi yadidaṃ idhāgamanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdatu, bhante, bhagavā idamāsanaṃ paññattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, sir, sit down, this seat is ready.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdi bhagavā paññatte āsane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vacchagottopi kho paribbājako aññataraṃ nīcaṃ āsanaṃ gahetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while Vacchagotta took a low seat and sat to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho vacchagotto paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vacchagotta said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bhante: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have heard this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samaṇo gotamo sabbaññū sabbadassāvī, aparisesaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ paṭijānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The ascetic Gotama claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception, thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">carato ca me tiṭṭhato ca suttassa ca jāgarassa ca satataṃ samitaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ paccupaṭṭhitan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually present to me, while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.”’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te, bhante, evamāhaṃsu: ‘samaṇo gotamo sabbaññū sabbadassāvī, aparisesaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ paṭijānāti, carato ca me tiṭṭhato ca suttassa ca jāgarassa ca satataṃ samitaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ paccupaṭṭhitan’ti, kacci te, bhante, bhagavato vuttavādino, na ca bhagavantaṃ abhūtena abbhācikkhanti, dhammassa cānudhammaṃ byākaronti, na ca koci sahadhammiko vādānuvādo gārayhaṃ ṭhānaṃ āgacchatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">I trust that those who say this repeat what the Buddha has said, and do not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuke and criticism?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, vaccha, evamāhaṃsu: ‘samaṇo gotamo sabbaññū sabbadassāvī, aparisesaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ paṭijānāti, carato ca me tiṭṭhato ca suttassa ca jāgarassa ca satataṃ samitaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ paccupaṭṭhitan’ti, na me te vuttavādino, abbhācikkhanti ca pana maṃ asatā abhūtenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Vaccha, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They misrepresent me with what is false and untrue.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ byākaramānā pana mayaṃ, bhante, vuttavādino ceva bhagavato assāma, na ca bhagavantaṃ abhūtena abbhācikkheyyāma, dhammassa cānudhammaṃ byākareyyāma, na ca koci sahadhammiko vādānuvādo gārayhaṃ ṭhānaṃ āgaccheyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So how should we answer so as to repeat what the Buddha has said, and not misrepresent him with an untruth? How should we explain in line with his teaching, with no legitimate grounds for rebuke and criticism?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Tevijjo samaṇo gotamo’ti kho, vaccha, byākaramāno vuttavādī ceva me assa, na ca maṃ abhūtena abbhācikkheyya, dhammassa cānudhammaṃ byākareyya, na ca koci sahadhammiko vādānuvādo gārayhaṃ ṭhānaṃ āgaccheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘The ascetic Gotama has the three knowledges.’ Answering like this you would repeat what I have said, and not misrepresent me with an untruth. You would explain in line with my teaching, and there would be no legitimate grounds for rebuke and criticism. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, vaccha, yāvadeva ākaṅkhāmi anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For, Vaccha, whenever I want, I recollect my many kinds of past lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo … pe … iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. I remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so I recollect my many kinds of past lives, with features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, vaccha, yāvadeva ākaṅkhāmi dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passāmi cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate … pe … yathākammūpage satte pajānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And whenever I want, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, vaccha, āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. I live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tevijjo samaṇo gotamo’ti kho, vaccha, byākaramāno vuttavādī ceva me assa, na ca maṃ abhūtena abbhācikkheyya, dhammassa cānudhammaṃ byākareyya, na ca koci sahadhammiko vādānuvādo gārayhaṃ ṭhānaṃ āgaccheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The ascetic Gotama has the three knowledges.’ Answering like this you would repeat what I have said, and not misrepresent me with an untruth. You would explain in line with my teaching, and there would be no legitimate grounds for rebuke and criticism.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, vacchagotto paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthi nu kho, bho gotama, koci gihī gihisaṃyojanaṃ appahāya kāyassa bhedā dukkhassantakaro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, are there any laypeople who, without giving up the fetter of lay life, make an end of suffering when the body breaks up?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthi kho, vaccha, koci gihī gihisaṃyojanaṃ appahāya kāyassa bhedā dukkhassantakaro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Vaccha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi pana, bho gotama, koci gihī gihisaṃyojanaṃ appahāya kāyassa bhedā saggūpago”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But are there any laypeople who, without giving up the fetter of lay life, go to heaven when the body breaks up?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, vaccha, ekaṃyeva sataṃ na dve satāni na tīṇi satāni na cattāri satāni na pañca satāni, atha kho bhiyyova ye gihī gihisaṃyojanaṃ appahāya kāyassa bhedā saggūpagā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s not just one hundred laypeople, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred, but many more than that who, without giving up the fetter of lay life, go to heaven when the body breaks up.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi nu kho, bho gotama, koci ājīvako kāyassa bhedā dukkhassantakaro”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, are there any <i>Ājīvaka</i> ascetics who make an end of suffering when the body breaks up?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthi kho, vaccha, koci ājīvako kāyassa bhedā dukkhassantakaro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Vaccha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi pana, bho gotama, koci ājīvako kāyassa bhedā saggūpago”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But are there any <i>Ājīvaka</i> ascetics who go to heaven when the body breaks up?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ito kho so, vaccha, ekanavuto kappo yamahaṃ anussarāmi, nābhijānāmi kañci ājīvakaṃ saggūpagaṃ aññatra ekena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Vaccha, when I recollect the past ninety-one eons, I can’t find any <i>Ājīvaka</i> ascetics who have gone to heaven, except one; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sopāsi kammavādī kiriyavādī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he taught the efficacy of deeds and action.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ sante, bho gotama, suññaṃ aduṃ titthāyatanaṃ antamaso saggūpagenapī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In that case, Master Gotama, the sectarian tenets are empty even of the chance to go to heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, vaccha, suññaṃ aduṃ titthāyatanaṃ antamaso saggūpagenapī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Vaccha, the sectarian tenets are empty even of the chance to go to heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamano vacchagotto paribbājako bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the wanderer Vacchagotta was happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tevijjavacchasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
