<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn089-Dhammacetiyasutta  - Shrines to the Teaching </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Dhammacetiyasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">Shrines to the Teaching </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 89  - Middle Discourses 89 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati medāḷupaṃ nāma sakyānaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near the Sakyan town named Medeḷumpa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rājā pasenadi kosalo nagarakaṃ anuppatto hoti kenacideva karaṇīyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived at Nagaraka on some business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo dīghaṃ kārāyanaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he addressed Dīgha Kārāyana, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yojehi, samma kārāyana, bhadrāni bhadrāni yānāni, uyyānabhūmiṃ gacchāma subhūmiṃ dassanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“My good Kārāyana, harness the finest chariots. We will go to a park and see the scenery.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, devā”ti kho dīgho kārāyano rañño pasenadissa kosalassa paṭissutvā bhadrāni bhadrāni yānāni yojāpetvā rañño pasenadissa kosalassa paṭivedesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Your Majesty,” replied Dīgha Kārāyana. He harnessed the chariots and informed the king, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yuttāni kho te, deva, bhadrāni bhadrāni yānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassadāni kālaṃ maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhadraṃ yānaṃ abhiruhitvā bhadrehi bhadrehi yānehi nagarakamhā niyyāsi mahaccā rājānubhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set out in full royal pomp from Nagaraka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena ārāmo tena pāyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">heading for the park grounds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatikā yānassa bhūmi, yānena gantvā yānā paccorohitvā pattikova ārāmaṃ pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and entered the park on foot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho rājā pasenadi kosalo ārāme jaṅghāvihāraṃ anucaṅkamamāno anuvicaramāno rukkhamūlāni pāsādikāni pasādanīyāni appasaddāni appanigghosāni vijanavātāni manussarāhasseyyakāni paṭisallānasāruppāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As he was going for a walk in the park he saw roots of trees that were impressive and inspiring, quiet and still, far from the madding crowd, remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhagavantaṃyeva ārabbha sati udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sight reminded him right away of the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imāni kho tāni rukkhamūlāni pāsādikāni pasādanīyāni appasaddāni appanigghosāni vijanavātāni manussarāhasseyyakāni paṭisallānasāruppāni, yattha sudaṃ mayaṃ taṃ bhagavantaṃ payirupāsāma arahantaṃ sammāsambuddhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These roots of trees, so impressive and inspiring, are like those where we used to pay homage to the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo dīghaṃ kārāyanaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He addressed Dīgha Kārāyana, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imāni kho, samma kārāyana, tāni rukkhamūlāni pāsādikāni pasādanīyāni appasaddāni appanigghosāni vijanavātāni manussarāhasseyyakāni paṭisallānasāruppāni, yattha sudaṃ mayaṃ taṃ bhagavantaṃ payirupāsāma arahantaṃ sammāsambuddhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These roots of trees, so impressive and inspiring, are like those where we used to pay homage to the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kahaṃ nu kho, samma kārāyana, etarahi so bhagavā viharati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">My good Kārāyana, where is that Buddha at present?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, mahārāja, medāḷupaṃ nāma sakyānaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, there is a Sakyan town named Medaḷumpa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha so bhagavā etarahi viharati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s where the Buddha is now staying.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kīvadūre pana, samma kārāyana, nagarakamhā medāḷupaṃ nāma sakyānaṃ nigamo hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how far away is that town?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na dūre, mahārāja; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Not far, great king, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tīṇi yojanāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s three leagues. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkā divasāvasesena gantun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">We can get there while it’s still light.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, samma kārāyana, yojehi bhadrāni bhadrāni yānāni, gamissāma mayaṃ taṃ bhagavantaṃ dassanāya arahantaṃ sammāsambuddhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, harness the chariots, and we shall go to see the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, devā”ti kho dīgho kārāyano rañño pasenadissa kosalassa paṭissutvā bhadrāni bhadrāni yānāni yojāpetvā rañño pasenadissa kosalassa paṭivedesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Your Majesty,” replied Dīgha Kārāyana. He harnessed the chariots and informed the king, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yuttāni kho te, deva, bhadrāni bhadrāni yānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassadāni kālaṃ maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhadraṃ yānaṃ abhiruhitvā bhadrehi bhadrehi yānehi nagarakamhā yena medāḷupaṃ nāma sakyānaṃ nigamo tena pāyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set out from Nagaraka to Medaḷumpa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Teneva divasāvasesena medāḷupaṃ nāma sakyānaṃ nigamaṃ sampāpuṇi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He reached the town while it was still light </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena ārāmo tena pāyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and headed for the park grounds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatikā yānassa bhūmi, yānena gantvā yānā paccorohitvā pattikova ārāmaṃ pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on foot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū abbhokāse caṅkamanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time several mendicants were walking meditation in the open air. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo yena te bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te bhikkhū etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to them and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kahaṃ nu kho, bhante, etarahi so bhagavā viharati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sirs, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanakāmā hi mayaṃ taṃ bhagavantaṃ arahantaṃ sammāsambuddhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I want to see him.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eso, mahārāja, vihāro saṃvutadvāro. Tena appasaddo upasaṅkamitvā ataramāno āḷindaṃ pavisitvā ukkāsitvā aggaḷaṃ ākoṭehi. Vivarissati bhagavā te dvāran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, that’s his dwelling, with the door closed. Approach it quietly, without hurrying; go onto the porch, clear your throat, and knock with the latch. The Buddha will open the door.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo tattheva khaggañca uṇhīsañca dīghassa kārāyanassa pādāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The king right away presented his sword and turban to Dīgha Kārāyana, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho dīghassa kārāyanassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">who thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“rahāyati kho dāni rājā, idheva dāni mayā ṭhātabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now the king seeks privacy. I should wait here.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo yena so vihāro saṃvutadvāro tena appasaddo upasaṅkamitvā ataramāno āḷindaṃ pavisitvā ukkāsitvā aggaḷaṃ ākoṭesi. Vivari bhagavā dvāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the king approached the Buddha’s dwelling and knocked, and the Buddha opened the door. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo vihāraṃ pavisitvā bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavato pādāni mukhena ca paricumbati, pāṇīhi ca parisambāhati, nāmañca sāveti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">King Pasenadi entered the dwelling, and bowed with his head to the Buddha’s feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“rājāhaṃ, bhante, pasenadi kosalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājāhaṃ, bhante, pasenadi kosalo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana tvaṃ, mahārāja, atthavasaṃ sampassamāno imasmiṃ sarīre evarūpaṃ paramanipaccakāraṃ karosi, mittūpahāraṃ upadaṃsesī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But great king, for what reason do you demonstrate such utmost devotion for this body, conveying your manifest love?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi kho me, bhante, bhagavati dhammanvayo hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I infer about the Buddha from the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddho bhagavā, svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāhaṃ, bhante, passāmi eke samaṇabrāhmaṇe pariyantakataṃ brahmacariyaṃ carante dasapi vassāni, vīsampi vassāni, tiṃsampi vassāni, cattārīsampi vassāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It happens, sir, that I see some ascetics and brahmins leading the spiritual life only for a limited period: ten, twenty, thirty, or forty years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te aparena samayena sunhātā suvilittā kappitakesamassū pañcahi kāmaguṇehi samappitā samaṅgībhūtā paricārenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some time later—nicely bathed and anointed, with hair and beard dressed—they amuse themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panāhaṃ, bhante, bhikkhū passāmi yāvajīvaṃ āpāṇakoṭikaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But here I see the mendicants leading the spiritual life entirely full and pure as long as they live, to their last breath. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho panāhaṃ, bhante, ito bahiddhā aññaṃ evaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t see any other spiritual life elsewhere so full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho me, bhante, bhagavati dhammanvayo hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddho bhagavā, svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhante, rājānopi rājūhi vivadanti, khattiyāpi khattiyehi vivadanti, brāhmaṇāpi brāhmaṇehi vivadanti, gahapatayopi gahapatīhi vivadanti, mātāpi puttena vivadati, puttopi mātarā vivadati, pitāpi puttena vivadati, puttopi pitarā vivadati, bhātāpi bhaginiyā vivadati, bhaginīpi bhātarā vivadati, sahāyopi sahāyena vivadati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, kings fight with kings, aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, householders fight with householders. A mother fights with her child, child with mother, father with child, and child with father. Brother fights with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, and friend fights with friend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panāhaṃ, bhante, bhikkhū passāmi samagge sammodamāne avivadamāne khīrodakībhūte aññamaññaṃ piyacakkhūhi sampassante viharante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But here I see the mendicants living in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho panāhaṃ, bhante, ito bahiddhā aññaṃ evaṃ samaggaṃ parisaṃ samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t see any other assembly elsewhere so harmonious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho me, bhante, bhagavati dhammanvayo hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddho bhagavā, svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparāhaṃ, bhante, ārāmena ārāmaṃ, uyyānena uyyānaṃ anucaṅkamāmi anuvicarāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, I have walked and wandered from monastery to monastery and from park to park. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṃ tattha passāmi eke samaṇabrāhmaṇe kise lūkhe dubbaṇṇe uppaṇḍuppaṇḍukajāte dhamanisanthatagatte, na viya maññe cakkhuṃ bandhante janassa dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There I’ve seen some ascetics and brahmins who are thin, haggard, pale, and veiny—hardly a captivating sight, you’d think. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘addhā ime āyasmanto anabhiratā vā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, atthi vā tesaṃ kiñci pāpaṃ kammaṃ kataṃ paṭicchannaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Clearly these venerables lead the spiritual life dissatisfied, or they’re hiding some bad deed they’ve done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathā hi ime āyasmanto kisā lūkhā dubbaṇṇā uppaṇḍuppaṇḍukajātā dhamanisanthatagattā, na viya maññe cakkhuṃ bandhanti janassa dassanāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why they’re thin, haggard, pale, and veiny—hardly a captivating sight, you’d think.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tyāhaṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went up to them and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kiṃ nu kho tumhe āyasmanto kisā lūkhā dubbaṇṇā uppaṇḍuppaṇḍukajātā dhamanisanthatagattā, na viya maññe cakkhuṃ bandhatha janassa dassanāyā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, why are you so thin, haggard, pale, and veiny—hardly a captivating sight, you’d think?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bandhukarogo no, mahārājā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We have jaundice, great king.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panāhaṃ, bhante, bhikkhū passāmi haṭṭhapahaṭṭhe udaggudagge abhiratarūpe pīṇindriye appossukke pannalome paradattavutte migabhūtena cetasā viharante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But here I see mendicants always smiling and joyful, obviously happy, with cheerful faces, living relaxed, unruffled, surviving on charity, their hearts free as a wild deer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘addhā ime āyasmanto tassa bhagavato sāsane uḷāraṃ pubbenāparaṃ visesaṃ jānanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Clearly these venerables have realized a higher distinction in the Buddha’s instructions than they had before. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathā hi ime āyasmanto haṭṭhapahaṭṭhā udaggudaggā abhiratarūpā pīṇindriyā appossukkā pannalomā paradattavuttā migabhūtena cetasā viharantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why these venerables are always smiling and joyful, obviously happy, with cheerful faces, living relaxed, unruffled, surviving on charity, their hearts free as a wild deer.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho me, bhante, bhagavati dhammanvayo hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddho bhagavā, svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparāhaṃ, bhante, rājā khattiyo muddhāvasitto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, as an anointed king </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pahomi ghātetāyaṃ vā ghātetuṃ, jāpetāyaṃ vā jāpetuṃ, pabbājetāyaṃ vā pabbājetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am able to execute, fine, or banish those who are guilty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, aḍḍakaraṇe nisinnassa antarantarā kathaṃ opātenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet when I’m sitting in judgment they interrupt me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṃ na labhāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I can’t get them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me bhonto aḍḍakaraṇe nisinnassa antarantarā kathaṃ opātetha, kathāpariyosānaṃ me bhonto āgamentū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to stop interrupting me and wait until I’ve finished speaking. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, antarantarā kathaṃ opātenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panāhaṃ, bhante, bhikkhū passāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But here I’ve seen the mendicants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yasmiṃ samaye bhagavā anekasatāya parisāya dhammaṃ deseti, neva tasmiṃ samaye bhagavato sāvakānaṃ khipitasaddo vā hoti ukkāsitasaddo vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while the Buddha is teaching an assembly of many hundreds, and there is no sound of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhante, bhagavā anekasatāya parisāya dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once it so happened that the Buddha was teaching an assembly of many hundreds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatraññataro bhagavato sāvako ukkāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then one of his disciples cleared their throat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ aññataro sabrahmacārī jaṇṇukena ghaṭṭesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And one of their spiritual companions nudged them with their knee, to indicate: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘appasaddo āyasmā hotu, māyasmā saddamakāsi; satthā no bhagavā dhammaṃ desetī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Hush, venerable, don’t make a sound! Our teacher, the Blessed One, is teaching!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘acchariyaṃ vata bho, abbhutaṃ vata bho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s incredible, it’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaṇḍena vata kira, bho, asatthena evaṃ suvinītā parisā bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how an assembly can be so well trained without rod or sword!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho panāhaṃ, bhante, ito bahiddhā aññaṃ evaṃ suvinītaṃ parisaṃ samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t see any other assembly elsewhere so well trained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho me, bhante, bhagavati dhammanvayo hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddho bhagavā, svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparāhaṃ, bhante, passāmi idhekacce khattiyapaṇḍite nipuṇe kataparappavāde vālavedhirūpe. Te bhindantā maññe caranti paññāgatena diṭṭhigatāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, I’ve seen some clever aristocrats who are subtle, accomplished in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. You’d think they live to demolish convictions with their intellect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te suṇanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They hear: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samaṇo khalu, bho, gotamo amukaṃ nāma gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā osarissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘So, gentlemen, that ascetic Gotama will come down to such and such village or town.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te pañhaṃ abhisaṅkharonti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They formulate a question, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imaṃ mayaṃ pañhaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ upasaṅkamitvā pucchissāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We’ll approach the ascetic Gotama and ask him this question. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañce no puṭṭho evaṃ byākarissati, evamassa mayaṃ vādaṃ āropessāma; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he answers like this, we’ll refute him like that; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañcepi no puṭṭho evaṃ byākarissati, evampissa mayaṃ vādaṃ āropessāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and if he answers like that, we’ll refute him like this.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te suṇanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samaṇo khalu, bho, gotamo amukaṃ nāma gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā osaṭo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has come down </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they approach him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhagavā dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha educates, encourages, fires up, and inspires them with a Dhamma talk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṃsitā na ceva bhagavantaṃ pañhaṃ pucchanti, kuto vādaṃ āropessanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t even get around to asking their question to the Buddha, so how could they refute his answer? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññadatthu bhagavato sāvakā sampajjanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Invariably, they become his disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho me, bhante, bhagavati dhammanvayo hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddho bhagavā, svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparāhaṃ, bhante, passāmi idhekacce brāhmaṇapaṇḍite … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, I see some clever brahmins … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gahapatipaṇḍite … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">some clever householders … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇapaṇḍite nipuṇe kataparappavāde vālavedhirūpe. Te bhindantā maññe caranti paññāgatena diṭṭhigatāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">some clever ascetics who are subtle, accomplished in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te suṇanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samaṇo khalu, bho, gotamo amukaṃ nāma gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā osarissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te pañhaṃ abhisaṅkharonti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imaṃ mayaṃ pañhaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ upasaṅkamitvā pucchissāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañce no puṭṭho evaṃ byākarissati, evamassa mayaṃ vādaṃ āropessāma; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañcepi no puṭṭho evaṃ byākarissati, evampissa mayaṃ vādaṃ āropessāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te suṇanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samaṇo khalu, bho, gotamo amukaṃ nāma gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā osaṭo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhagavā dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṃsitā na ceva bhagavantaṃ pañhaṃ pucchanti, kuto vādaṃ āropessanti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t even get around to asking their question to the Buddha, so how could they refute his answer? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññadatthu bhagavantaṃyeva okāsaṃ yācanti agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Invariably, they ask the ascetic Gotama for the chance to go forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhagavā pabbājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he gives them the going-forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tathāpabbajitā samānā ekā vūpakaṭṭhā appamattā ātāpino pahitattā viharantā nacirasseva—yassatthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṃ—brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon after going forth, living withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, they realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. They live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘manaṃ vata, bho, anassāma; manaṃ vata, bho, panassāma’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We were almost lost! We almost perished! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayañhi pubbe assamaṇāva samānā samaṇāmhāti paṭijānimhā, abrāhmaṇāva samānā brāhmaṇāmhāti paṭijānimhā, anarahantova samānā arahantāmhāti paṭijānimhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For we used to claim that we were ascetics, brahmins, and perfected ones, but we were none of these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Idāni khomha samaṇā, idāni khomha brāhmaṇā, idāni khomha arahanto’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But now we really are ascetics, brahmins, and perfected ones!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho me, bhante, bhagavati dhammanvayo hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddho bhagavā, svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparāhaṃ, bhante, ime isidattapurāṇā thapatayo mamabhattā mamayānā, ahaṃ nesaṃ jīvikāya dātā, yasassa āhattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, these chamberlains Isidatta and Purāṇa share my meals and my carriages. I give them a livelihood and bring them renown. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca pana no tathā mayi nipaccakāraṃ karonti yathā bhagavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And yet they don’t show me the same level of devotion that they show to the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtapubbāhaṃ, bhante, senaṃ abbhuyyāto samāno ime ca isidattapurāṇā thapatayo vīmaṃsamāno aññatarasmiṃ sambādhe āvasathe vāsaṃ upagacchiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once it so happened that while I was leading a military campaign and testing Isidatta and Purāṇa I took up residence in a cramped house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhante, ime isidattapurāṇā thapatayo bahudeva rattiṃ dhammiyā kathāya vītināmetvā, yato ahosi bhagavā tato sīsaṃ katvā maṃ pādato karitvā nipajjiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They spent most of the night discussing the teaching, then they lay down with their heads towards where the Buddha was and their feet towards me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘acchariyaṃ vata bho, abbhutaṃ vata bho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It’s incredible, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime isidattapurāṇā thapatayo mamabhattā mamayānā, ahaṃ nesaṃ jīvikāya dātā, yasassa āhattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">These chamberlains Isidatta and Purāṇa share my meals and my carriages. I give them a livelihood and bring them renown. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca pana no tathā mayi nipaccakāraṃ karonti yathā bhagavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And yet they don’t show me the same level of devotion that they show to the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addhā ime āyasmanto tassa bhagavato sāsane uḷāraṃ pubbenāparaṃ visesaṃ jānantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Clearly these venerables have realized a higher distinction in the Buddha’s instructions than they had before.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi kho me, bhante, bhagavati dhammanvayo hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddho bhagavā, svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṃgho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhante, bhagavāpi khattiyo, ahampi khattiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, the Buddha is an aristocrat, and so am I. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavāpi kosalo, ahampi kosalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha is Kosalan, and so am I. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavāpi āsītiko, ahampi āsītiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha is eighty years old, and so am I. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, bhante, bhagavāpi khattiyo ahampi khattiyo, bhagavāpi kosalo ahampi kosalo, bhagavāpi āsītiko ahampi āsītiko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since this is so, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imināvārahāmevāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavati paramanipaccakāraṃ kātuṃ, mittūpahāraṃ upadaṃsetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s proper for me to show the Buddha such utmost devotion and demonstrate such friendship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handa ca dāni mayaṃ, bhante, gacchāma; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well, now, sir, I must go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahukiccā mayaṃ bahukaraṇīyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have many duties, and much to do.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassadāni tvaṃ, mahārāja, kālaṃ maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, great king, go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā acirapakkantassa rañño pasenadissa kosalassa bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon after the king had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“eso, bhikkhave, rājā pasenadi kosalo dhammacetiyāni bhāsitvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, before he got up and left, King Pasenadi spoke shrines to the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uggaṇhatha, bhikkhave, dhammacetiyāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Learn these shrines to the teaching! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyāpuṇātha, bhikkhave, dhammacetiyāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Memorize these shrines to the teaching! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhāretha, bhikkhave, dhammacetiyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Remember these shrines to the teaching! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthasaṃhitāni, bhikkhave, dhammacetiyāni ādibrahmacariyakānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These shrines to the teaching are beneficial and relate to the fundamentals of the spiritual life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammacetiyasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
