<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn092-Selasutta  - With Sela </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Selasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">With Sela </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 92  - Middle Discourses 92 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā aṅguttarāpesu cārikaṃ caramāno mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ aḍḍhateḷasehi bhikkhusatehi yena āpaṇaṃ nāma aṅguttarāpānaṃ nigamo tadavasari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Northern Āpaṇas together with a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants when he arrived at a town of the Northern Āpaṇas named Āpaṇa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho keṇiyo jaṭilo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“samaṇo khalu, bho, gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito aṅguttarāpesu cārikaṃ caramāno mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ aḍḍhateḷasehi bhikkhusatehi āpaṇaṃ anuppatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Āpaṇa, together with a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho pana bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ lokaṃ sadevakaṃ samārakaṃ sabrahmakaṃ sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiṃ pajaṃ sadevamanussaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho pana tathārūpānaṃ arahataṃ dassanaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good to see such perfected ones.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho keṇiyo jaṭilo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Keṇiya approached the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho keṇiyaṃ jaṭilaṃ bhagavā dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṃsesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired him with a Dhamma talk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho keṇiyo jaṭilo bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassito samādapito samuttejito sampahaṃsito bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“adhivāsetu me bhavaṃ gotamo svātanāya bhattaṃ saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṅghenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Would Master Gotama together with the mendicant Saṅgha please accept tomorrow’s meal from me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhagavā keṇiyaṃ jaṭilaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahā kho, keṇiya, bhikkhusaṅgho aḍḍhateḷasāni bhikkhusatāni, tvañca brāhmaṇesu abhippasanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Saṅgha is large, Keṇiya; there are 1,250 mendicants. And you are devoted to the brahmins.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho keṇiyo jaṭilo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiñcāpi kho, bho gotama, mahā bhikkhusaṅgho aḍḍhateḷasāni bhikkhusatāni, ahañca brāhmaṇesu abhippasanno; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhivāsetu me bhavaṃ gotamo svātanāya bhattaṃ saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṅghenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā keṇiyaṃ jaṭilaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahā kho, keṇiya, bhikkhusaṅgho aḍḍhateḷasāni bhikkhusatāni, tvañca brāhmaṇesu abhippasanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho keṇiyo jaṭilo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time Keṇiya asked the Buddha to accept a meal offering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiñcāpi kho, bho gotama, mahā bhikkhusaṅgho aḍḍhateḷasāni bhikkhusatāni, ahañca brāhmaṇesu abhippasanno; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhivāsetu me bhavaṃ gotamo svātanāya bhattaṃ saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṅghenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Finally, the Buddha consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho keṇiyo jaṭilo bhagavato adhivāsanaṃ viditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā yena sako assamo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā mittāmacce ñātisālohite āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Keṇiya got up from his seat and went to his own hermitage. There he addressed his friends and colleagues, relatives and family members, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“suṇantu me bhonto, mittāmaccā ñātisālohitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Gentlemen, please listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇo me gotamo nimantito svātanāya bhattaṃ saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṃghena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ascetic Gotama together with the mendicant Saṅgha has been invited by me for tomorrow’s meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena me kāyaveyyāvaṭikaṃ kareyyāthā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please help me with the preparations.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”ti kho keṇiyassa jaṭilassa mittāmaccā ñātisālohitā keṇiyassa jaṭilassa paṭissutvā appekacce uddhanāni khaṇanti, appekacce kaṭṭhāni phālenti, appekacce bhājanāni dhovanti, appekacce udakamaṇikaṃ patiṭṭhāpenti, appekacce āsanāni paññapenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. Some dug ovens, some chopped wood, some washed dishes, some set out a water jar, and some spread out seats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Keṇiyo pana jaṭilo sāmaṃyeva maṇḍalamālaṃ paṭiyādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Meanwhile, Keṇiya set up the pavilion himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena selo brāhmaṇo āpaṇe paṭivasati tiṇṇaṃ vedānaṃ pāragū sanighaṇḍukeṭubhānaṃ sākkharappabhedānaṃ itihāsapañcamānaṃ, padako, veyyākaraṇo, lokāyatamahāpurisalakkhaṇesu anavayo, tīṇi ca māṇavakasatāni mante vāceti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmin Sela was residing in Āpaṇa. He had mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies, ritual, phonology and etymology, and the testament as fifth. He knew philology and grammar, and was well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man. And he was teaching three hundred students to recite the hymns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena keṇiyo jaṭilo sele brāhmaṇe abhippasanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Keṇiya was devoted to Sela. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selo brāhmaṇo tīhi māṇavakasatehi parivuto jaṅghāvihāraṃ anucaṅkamamāno anuvicaramāno yena keṇiyassa jaṭilassa assamo tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sela, while going for a walk escorted by the three hundred students, approached Keṇiya’s hermitage. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho selo brāhmaṇo keṇiyassa jaṭilassa assame appekacce uddhanāni khaṇante, appekacce kaṭṭhāni phālente, appekacce bhājanāni dhovante, appekacce udakamaṇikaṃ patiṭṭhāpente, appekacce āsanāni paññapente, keṇiyaṃ pana jaṭilaṃ sāmaṃyeva maṇḍalamālaṃ paṭiyādentaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He saw the preparations going on, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna keṇiyaṃ jaṭilaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to Keṇiya, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu bhoto keṇiyassa āvāho vā bhavissati vivāho vā bhavissati mahāyañño vā paccupaṭṭhito, rājā vā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro nimantito svātanāya saddhiṃ balakāyenā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Keṇiya, is your son or daughter being married? Or are you setting up a big sacrifice? Or has King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha been invited for tomorrow’s meal?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, bho sela, āvāho bhavissati napi vivāho bhavissati napi rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro nimantito svātanāya saddhiṃ balakāyena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is no marriage, Sela, and the king is not coming. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ca kho me mahāyañño paccupaṭṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, I am setting up a big sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bho, samaṇo gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito aṅguttarāpesu cārikaṃ caramāno mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ aḍḍhateḷasehi bhikkhusatehi āpaṇaṃ anuppatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ascetic Gotama has arrived at Āpaṇa, together with a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho pana bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So me nimantito svātanāya bhattaṃ saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṅghenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has been invited by me for tomorrow’s meal together with the mendicant Saṅgha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Buddhoti—bho keṇiya, vadesi”? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mister Keṇiya, did you say ‘the awakened one’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Buddhoti—bho sela, vadāmi”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I said ‘the awakened one’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Buddhoti—bho keṇiya, vadesi”? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Did you say ‘the awakened one’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Buddhoti—bho sela, vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I said ‘the awakened one’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selassa brāhmaṇassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sela thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ghosopi kho eso dullabho lokasmiṃ—yadidaṃ ‘buddho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s hard to even find the word ‘awakened one’ in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āgatāni kho panamhākaṃ mantesu dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yehi samannāgatassa mahāpurisassa dveyeva gatiyo bhavanti anaññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The thirty-two marks of a great man have been handed down in our hymns. A great man who possesses these has only two possible destinies, no other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī dhammiko dhammarājā cāturanto vijitāvī janapadatthāvariyappatto sattaratanasamannāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stays at home he becomes a king, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he possesses the seven treasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassimāni satta ratanāni bhavanti, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He has the following seven treasures: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkaratanaṃ, hatthiratanaṃ, assaratanaṃ, maṇiratanaṃ, itthiratanaṃ, gahapatiratanaṃ, pariṇāyakaratanameva sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and the counselor as the seventh treasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parosahassaṃ kho panassa puttā bhavanti sūrā vīraṅgarūpā parasenappamaddanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ pathaviṃ sāgarapariyantaṃ adaṇḍena asatthena dhammena abhivijiya ajjhāvasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After conquering this land girt by sea, he reigns by principle, without rod or sword. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace pana agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati, arahaṃ hoti sammāsambuddho loke vivaṭṭacchado”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kahaṃ pana, bho keṇiya, etarahi so bhavaṃ gotamo viharati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Keṇiya, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, keṇiyo jaṭilo dakkhiṇaṃ bāhuṃ paggahetvā selaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Keṇiya pointed with his right arm and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yenesā, bho sela, nīlavanarājī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There, Mister Sela, at that line of blue forest.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selo brāhmaṇo tīhi māṇavakasatehi saddhiṃ yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sela, together with his students, approached the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selo brāhmaṇo te māṇavake āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He said to his students, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“appasaddā bhonto āgacchantu pade padaṃ nikkhipantā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come quietly, gentlemen, tread gently. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">durāsadā hi te bhagavanto sīhāva ekacarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the Buddhas are intimidating, like a lion living alone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā cāhaṃ, bho, samaṇena gotamena saddhiṃ manteyyaṃ, mā me bhonto antarantarā kathaṃ opātetha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When I’m consulting with the ascetic Gotama, don’t interrupt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathāpariyosānaṃ me bhavanto āgamentū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wait until I’ve finished speaking.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sela went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho selo brāhmaṇo bhagavato kāye dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni samannesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and scrutinized the Buddha’s body for the thirty-two marks of a great man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho selo brāhmaṇo bhagavato kāye dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yebhuyyena ṭhapetvā dve. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He saw all of them except for two, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīsu mahāpurisalakkhaṇesu kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">which he had doubts about: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosohite ca vatthaguyhe pahūtajivhatāya ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whether the private parts are retracted, and the largeness of the tongue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passati kho me ayaṃ selo brāhmaṇo dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yebhuyyena ṭhapetvā dve. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sela sees all the marks except for two, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīsu mahāpurisalakkhaṇesu kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">which he has doubts about: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosohite ca vatthaguyhe pahūtajivhatāya cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whether the private parts are retracted, and the largeness of the tongue.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tathārūpaṃ iddhābhisaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkhāsi, yathā addasa selo brāhmaṇo bhagavato kosohitaṃ vatthaguyhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha used his psychic power to will that Sela would see his retracted private parts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā jivhaṃ ninnāmetvā ubhopi kaṇṇasotāni anumasi paṭimasi; ubhopi nāsikasotāni anumasi paṭimasi; kevalampi nalāṭamaṇḍalaṃ jivhāya chādesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he stuck out his tongue and stroked back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his entire forehead with his tongue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selassa brāhmaṇassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sela thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“samannāgato kho samaṇo gotamo dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇehi paripuṇṇehi, no aparipuṇṇehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks completely, lacking none. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ca kho naṃ jānāmi buddho vā no vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I don’t know whether or not he is an awakened one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutaṃ kho pana metaṃ brāhmaṇānaṃ vuddhānaṃ mahallakānaṃ ācariyapācariyānaṃ bhāsamānānaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have heard that brahmins of the past who were elderly and senior, the teachers of teachers, said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye te bhavanti arahanto sammāsambuddhā te sake vaṇṇe bhaññamāne attānaṃ pātukarontī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Those who are perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas reveal themselves when praised.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthaveyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I extoll him in his presence with fitting verses?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sela extolled the Buddha in his presence with fitting verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paripuṇṇakāyo suruci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“O Blessed One, your body’s perfect, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sujāto cārudassano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re radiant, handsome, lovely to behold; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suvaṇṇavaṇṇosi bhagavā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">golden colored, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susukkadāṭhosi vīriyavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with teeth so white; you’re strong. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Narassa hi sujātassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The characteristics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye bhavanti viyañjanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of a handsome man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe te tava kāyasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the marks of a great man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahāpurisalakkhaṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are all in your body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasannanetto sumukho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your eyes are clear, your face is fair, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahā uju patāpavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re formidable, upright, majestic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majjhe samaṇasaṃghassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the midst of the Saṅgha of ascetics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādiccova virocasi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you shine like the sun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalyāṇadassano bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re a mendicant fine to see, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kañcanasannibhattaco; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with skin of golden sheen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ te samaṇabhāvena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But with such excellent appearance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ uttamavaṇṇino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what do you want with the ascetic life? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā arahasi bhavituṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re fit to be a king, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkavattī rathesabho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a wheel-turning monarch, chief of charioteers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cāturanto vijitāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">victorious in the four directions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jambusaṇḍassa issaro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">lord of all India. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khattiyā bhogirājāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Aristocrats, nobles, and kings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuyantā bhavantu te; </span></p>
<p class="p3">follow your rule. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājābhirājā manujindo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gotama, you should reign </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rajjaṃ kārehi gotama”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as king of kings, lord of men!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rājāhamasmi selāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am a king, Sela—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammarājā anuttaro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the supreme king of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammena cakkaṃ vattemi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By the teaching I roll forth the wheel </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkaṃ appaṭivattiyaṃ”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">which cannot be rolled back.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sambuddho paṭijānāsi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You claim to be awakened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammarājā anuttaro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the supreme king of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Dhammena cakkaṃ vattemi’, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I roll forth the teaching’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti bhāsasi gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so you say, Gotama. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko nu senāpati bhoto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then who is your general, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvako satthuranvayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the disciple who follows the Teacher’s way? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko tetamanuvatteti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who keeps rolling the wheel </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammacakkaṃ pavattitaṃ”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of teaching you rolled forth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayā pavattitaṃ cakkaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“By me the wheel was rolled forth,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(selāti bhagavā) </span></p>
<p class="p3">said the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammacakkaṃ anuttaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“the supreme wheel of teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāriputto anuvatteti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta, taking after the Realized One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anujāto tathāgataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">keeps it rolling on. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhiññeyyaṃ abhiññātaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have known what should be known, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhāvetabbañca bhāvitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and developed what should be developed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahātabbaṃ pahīnaṃ me, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and given up what should be given up: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā buddhosmi brāhmaṇa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and so, brahmin, I am a Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vinayassu mayi kaṅkhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dispel your doubt in me—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhimuccassu brāhmaṇa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">make up your mind, brahmin! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dullabhaṃ dassanaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sight of a Buddha </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambuddhānaṃ abhiṇhaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is hard to find again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ ve dullabho loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am a Buddha, brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pātubhāvo abhiṇhaso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the supreme surgeon, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṃ brāhmaṇa sambuddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">one of those whose appearance in the world </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sallakatto anuttaro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is hard to find again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmabhūto atitulo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Holy, unequalled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mārasenappamaddano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">crusher of Māra’s army; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbāmitte vasī katvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having subdued all my opponents, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">modāmi akutobhayo”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I rejoice, fearing nothing from any quarter.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imaṃ bhonto nisāmetha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Pay heed, sirs, to what </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā bhāsati cakkhumā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is spoken by the seer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sallakatto mahāvīro, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The surgeon, the great hero, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīhova nadatī vane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">roars like a lion in the jungle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmabhūtaṃ atitulaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Holy, unequalled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mārasenappamaddanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">crusher of Māra’s army; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko disvā nappasīdeyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who would not be inspired by him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api kaṇhābhijātiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">even one whose nature is dark? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo maṃ icchati anvetu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who wish may follow me; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo vā nicchati gacchatu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who don’t may go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāhaṃ pabbajissāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right here, I’ll go forth in the presence of him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">varapaññassa santike”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this man of such splendid wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etañce ruccati bhoto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, if you like </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsambuddhasāsanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching of the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayampi pabbajissāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">we’ll also go forth in the presence of him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">varapaññassa santike”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this man of such splendid wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brāhmaṇā tisatā ime, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These three hundred brahmins </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yācanti pañjalīkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with joined palms held up, ask: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Brahmacariyaṃ carissāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May we lead the spiritual life </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavā tava santike”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in your presence, Blessed One?’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Svākkhātaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The spiritual life is well explained,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(selāti bhagavā) </span></p>
<p class="p3">said the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sandiṭṭhikamakālikaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“visible in this very life, immediately effective. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha amoghā pabbajjā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here the going forth isn’t in vain </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamattassa sikkhato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for one who trains with diligence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alattha kho selo brāhmaṇo sapariso bhagavato santike pabbajjaṃ, alattha upasampadaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the brahmin Sela together with his assembly received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho keṇiyo jaṭilo tassā rattiyā accayena sake assame paṇītaṃ khādanīyaṃ bhojanīyaṃ paṭiyādāpetvā bhagavato kālaṃ ārocāpesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when the night had passed Keṇiya had a variety of delicious foods prepared in his own home. Then he had the Buddha informed of the time, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kālo, bho gotama, niṭṭhitaṃ bhattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s time, Master Gotama, the meal is ready.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena keṇiyassa jaṭilassa assamo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṅghena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to Keṇiya’s hermitage, where he sat on the seat spread out, together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho keṇiyo jaṭilo buddhappamukhaṃ bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappesi, sampavāresi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Keṇiya served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with his own hands with a variety of delicious foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho keṇiyo jaṭilo bhagavantaṃ bhuttāviṃ onītapattapāṇiṃ aññataraṃ nīcaṃ āsanaṃ gahetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Keṇiya took a low seat and sat to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho keṇiyaṃ jaṭilaṃ bhagavā imāhi gāthāhi anumodi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha expressed his appreciation with these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aggihuttamukhā yaññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The foremost of sacrifices is offering to the sacred flame; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvittī chandaso mukhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sāvittī is the foremost of poetic meters; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā mukhaṃ manussānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">of humans, the king is the foremost; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nadīnaṃ sāgaro mukhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the ocean’s the foremost of rivers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nakkhattānaṃ mukhaṃ cando, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the foremost of stars is the moon; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādicco tapataṃ mukhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the sun is the foremost of lights; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññaṃ ākaṅkhamānānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">for those who sacrifice seeking merit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgho ve yajataṃ mukhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha is the foremost.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā keṇiyaṃ jaṭilaṃ imāhi gāthāhi anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha had expressed his appreciation to Keṇiya the matted-hair ascetic with these verses, he got up from his seat and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā selo sapariso eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto viharanto nacirasseva—yassatthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṃ—brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sela and his assembly, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. They lived having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā”ti abbhaññāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is no return to any state of existence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro kho panāyasmā selo sapariso arahataṃ ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Sela together with his assembly became perfected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā selo sapariso yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekaṃsaṃ cīvaraṃ katvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sela with his assembly went to see the Buddha. He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ taṃ saraṇamāgamma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is the eighth day since </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ito aṭṭhami cakkhumā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">we went for refuge, O seer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattarattena bhagavā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In these seven days, Blessed One, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dantamha tava sāsane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">we’ve become tamed in your teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuvaṃ buddho tuvaṃ satthā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You are the Buddha, you are the Teacher, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tuvaṃ mārābhibhū muni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you are the sage who has overcome Māra; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuvaṃ anusaye chetvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you have cut off the underlying tendencies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇo tāresimaṃ pajaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve crossed over, and you bring humanity across. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upadhī te samatikkantā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You have transcended attachments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsavā te padālitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">your defilements are shattered; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīhova anupādāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">by not grasping, like a lion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pahīnabhayabheravo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve given up fear and dread. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhavo tisatā ime, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These three hundred mendicants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṭṭhanti pañjalīkatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">stand with joined palms raised. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāde vīra pasārehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Stretch out your feet, great hero: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāgā vandantu satthuno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">let these giants worship the Teacher.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Selasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
