<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn091-Brahmāyusutta  - With Brahmāyu </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Brahmāyusutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">With Brahmāyu </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 91  - Middle Discourses 91 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā videhesu cārikaṃ carati mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Videhans together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena brahmāyu brāhmaṇo mithilāyaṃ paṭivasati jiṇṇo vuḍḍho mahallako addhagato vayoanuppatto, vīsavassasatiko jātiyā, tiṇṇaṃ vedānaṃ pāragū sanighaṇḍukeṭubhānaṃ sākkharappabhedānaṃ itihāsapañcamānaṃ, padako, veyyākaraṇo, lokāyatamahāpurisalakkhaṇesu anavayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmin Brahmāyu was residing in Mithilā. He was old, elderly, and senior, advanced in years, having reached the final stage of life; he was a hundred and twenty years old. He had mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies, ritual, phonology and etymology, and the testament as fifth. He knew philology and grammar, and was well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“samaṇo khalu bho, gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito videhesu cārikaṃ carati mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—is wandering in the land of the Videhans, together with a large Saṅgha of around five hundred mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho pana bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ lokaṃ sadevakaṃ samārakaṃ sabrahmakaṃ sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiṃ pajaṃ sadevamanussaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He explains a teaching that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho pana tathārūpānaṃ arahataṃ dassanaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good to see such perfected ones.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena brahmāyussa brāhmaṇassa uttaro nāma māṇavo antevāsī hoti tiṇṇaṃ vedānaṃ pāragū sanighaṇḍukeṭubhānaṃ sākkharappabhedānaṃ itihāsapañcamānaṃ, padako, veyyākaraṇo, lokāyatamahāpurisalakkhaṇesu anavayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmin Brahmāyu had a student named Uttara. He too had mastered the Vedic curriculum</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo uttaraṃ māṇavaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Brahmāyu told Uttara of the Buddha’s presence in the land of the Videhans, and added: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ, tāta uttara, samaṇo gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito videhesu cārikaṃ carati mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho pana bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sādhu kho pana tathārūpānaṃ arahataṃ dassanaṃ hotī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ehi tvaṃ, tāta uttara, yena samaṇo gotamo tenupasaṅkama; upasaṅkamitvā samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ jānāhi, yadi vā taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ tathā santaṃyeva saddo abbhuggato, yadi vā no tathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, dear Uttara, go to the ascetic Gotama and find out whether or not he lives up to his reputation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi vā so bhavaṃ gotamo tādiso, yadi vā na tādiso. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā mayaṃ taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ vedissāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Through you I shall learn about Master Gotama.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ panāhaṃ, bho, taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ jānissāmi yadi vā taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ tathā santaṃyeva saddo abbhuggato, yadi vā no tathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how shall I find out whether or not the ascetic Gotama lives up to his reputation?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadi vā so bhavaṃ gotamo tādiso, yadi vā na tādiso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āgatāni kho, tāta uttara, amhākaṃ mantesu dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yehi samannāgatassa mahāpurisassa dveyeva gatiyo bhavanti anaññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Dear Uttara, the thirty-two marks of a great man have been handed down in our hymns. A great man who possesses these has only two possible destinies, no other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī dhammiko dhammarājā cāturanto vijitāvī janapadatthāvariyappatto sattaratanasamannāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stays at home he becomes a king, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he possesses the seven treasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassimāni satta ratanāni bhavanti, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He has the following seven treasures: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkaratanaṃ, hatthiratanaṃ, assaratanaṃ, maṇiratanaṃ, itthiratanaṃ, gahapatiratanaṃ, pariṇāyakaratanameva sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and the counselor as the seventh treasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parosahassaṃ kho panassa puttā bhavanti sūrā vīraṅgarūpā parasenappamaddanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ pathaviṃ sāgarapariyantaṃ adaṇḍena asatthena dhammena abhivijiya ajjhāvasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After conquering this land girt by sea, he reigns by principle, without rod or sword. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho pana agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati, arahaṃ hoti sammāsambuddho loke vivaṭṭacchado. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ kho pana, tāta uttara, mantānaṃ dātā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But, dear Uttara, I am the one who gives the hymns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tvaṃ mantānaṃ paṭiggahetā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and you are the one who receives them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”ti kho uttaro māṇavo brahmāyussa brāhmaṇassa paṭissutvā uṭṭhāyāsanā brahmāyuṃ brāhmaṇaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā videhesu yena bhagavā tena cārikaṃ pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Uttara. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled Brahmāyu before setting out for the land of the Videhans where the Buddha was wandering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupubbena cārikaṃ caramāno yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Traveling stage by stage, he came to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho uttaro māṇavo bhagavato kāye dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni samannesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and scrutinized his body for the thirty-two marks of a great man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho uttaro māṇavo bhagavato kāye dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yebhuyyena thapetvā dve. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He saw all of them except for two, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīsu mahāpurisalakkhaṇesu kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">which he had doubts about: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosohite ca vatthaguyhe pahūtajivhatāya ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whether the private parts are retracted, and the largeness of the tongue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passati kho me ayaṃ uttaro māṇavo dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yebhuyyena thapetvā dve. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This brahmin student Uttara sees all the marks except for two, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīsu mahāpurisalakkhaṇesu kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">which he has doubts about: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosohite ca vatthaguyhe pahūtajivhatāya cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whether the private parts are retracted, and the largeness of the tongue.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tathārūpaṃ iddhābhisaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkhāsi yathā addasa uttaro māṇavo bhagavato kosohitaṃ vatthaguyhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha used his psychic power to will that Uttara would see his retracted private parts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā jivhaṃ ninnāmetvā ubhopi kaṇṇasotāni anumasi paṭimasi; ubhopi nāsikasotāni anumasi paṭimasi; kevalampi nalāṭamaṇḍalaṃ jivhāya chādesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he stuck out his tongue and stroked back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his entire forehead with his tongue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uttarassa māṇavassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Uttara thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“samannāgato kho samaṇo gotamo dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ anubandheyyaṃ, iriyāpathamassa passeyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I follow him and observe his deportment?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uttaro māṇavo sattamāsāni bhagavantaṃ anubandhi chāyāva anapāyinī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Uttara followed the Buddha like a shadow for seven months. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uttaro māṇavo sattannaṃ māsānaṃ accayena videhesu yena mithilā tena cārikaṃ pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When seven months had passed he set out wandering towards Mithilā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupubbena cārikaṃ caramāno yena mithilā yena brahmāyu brāhmaṇo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā brahmāyuṃ brāhmaṇaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho uttaraṃ māṇavaṃ brahmāyu brāhmaṇo etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There he approached the brahmin Brahmāyu, bowed, and sat down to one side. Brahmāyu said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, tāta uttara, taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ tathā santaṃyeva saddo abbhuggato, no aññathā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, dear Uttara, does Master Gotama live up to his reputation or not?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci pana so bhavaṃ gotamo tādiso, no aññādiso”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathā santaṃyeva, bho, taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saddo abbhuggato, no aññathā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He does, sir. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tādisova so bhavaṃ gotamo, no aññādiso. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samannāgato ca so bhavaṃ gotamo dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Master Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suppatiṭṭhitapādo kho pana bho bhavaṃ gotamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has well-planted feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idampi tassa bhoto gotamassa mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ bhavati. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Heṭṭhā kho pana tassa bhoto gotamassa pādatalesu cakkāni jātāni sahassārāni sanemikāni sanābhikāni sabbākāraparipūrāni … (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">On the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and hubs, complete in every detail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyatapaṇhi kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has projecting heels. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīghaṅguli kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has long fingers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mudutalunahatthapādo kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His hands and feet are tender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jālahatthapādo kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His hands and feet cling gracefully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ussaṅkhapādo kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His feet are arched. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eṇijaṅgho kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His calves are like those of an antelope. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhitako kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo anonamanto ubhohi pāṇitalehi jaṇṇukāni parimasati parimajjati … (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">When standing upright and not bending over, the palms of both hands touch the knees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosohitavatthaguyho kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (10) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His private parts are retracted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suvaṇṇavaṇṇo kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo kañcanasannibhattaco … (11) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is gold colored; his skin has a golden sheen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhumacchavi kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo. Sukhumattā chaviyā rajojallaṃ kāye na upalimpati … (12) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don’t stick to his body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekekalomo kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo; ekekāni lomāni lomakūpesu jātāni … (13) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His hairs grow one per pore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaggalomo kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo; uddhaggāni lomāni jātāni nīlāni añjanavaṇṇāni kuṇḍalāvaṭṭāni dakkhiṇāvaṭṭakajātāni … (14) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His hairs stand up; they’re blue-black and curl clockwise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmujugatto kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (15) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His body is as straight as Brahmā’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattussado kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (16) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has bulging muscles in seven places. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīhapubbaddhakāyo kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (17) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His chest is like that of a lion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Citantaraṃso kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (18) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gap between the shoulder-blades is filled in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nigrodhaparimaṇḍalo kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo; yāvatakvassa kāyo tāvatakvassa byāmo, yāvatakvassa byāmo tāvatakvassa kāyo … (19) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has the proportional circumference of a banyan tree: the span of his arms equals the height of his body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samavaṭṭakkhandho kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (20) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His torso is cylindrical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rasaggasaggī kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (21) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has an excellent sense of taste. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīhahanu kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (22) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His jaw is like that of a lion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattālīsadanto kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (23) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has forty teeth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samadanto kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (24) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His teeth are even. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aviraḷadanto kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (25) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His teeth have no gaps. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susukkadāṭho kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (26) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His teeth are perfectly white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahūtajivho kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (27) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a large tongue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmassaro kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo karavikabhāṇī … (28) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has the voice of Brahmā, like a cuckoo’s call. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinīlanetto kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (29) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His eyes are deep blue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gopakhumo kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo … (30) </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has eyelashes like a cow’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṇṇā kho panassa bhoto gotamassa bhamukantare jātā odātā mudutūlasannibhā … (31) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and white like cotton-wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṇhīsasīso kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo; idampi tassa bhoto gotamassa mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ bhavati. (32) </span></p>
<p class="p3">His head is shaped like a turban. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bho, so bhavaṃ gotamo dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇehi samannāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the thirty-two marks of a great man possessed by Master Gotama. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gacchanto kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo dakkhiṇeneva pādena paṭhamaṃ pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he’s walking he takes the first step with the right foot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So nātidūre pādaṃ uddharati, nāccāsanne pādaṃ nikkhipati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t lift his foot too far or place it too near. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so nātisīghaṃ gacchati, nātisaṇikaṃ gacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t walk too slow or too fast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca adduvena adduvaṃ saṅghaṭṭento gacchati, na ca gopphakena gopphakaṃ saṅghaṭṭento gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He walks without knocking his knees or ankles together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So gacchanto na satthiṃ unnāmeti, na satthiṃ onāmeti; na satthiṃ sannāmeti, na satthiṃ vināmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he’s walking he keeps his thighs neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gacchato kho pana tassa bhoto gotamassa adharakāyova iñjati, na ca kāyabalena gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he walks, only the lower half of his body moves, and he walks effortlessly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apalokento kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo sabbakāyeneva apaloketi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he turns to look he does so with the whole body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so na uddhaṃ ulloketi, na adho oloketi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t look directly up or down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca vipekkhamāno gacchati, yugamattañca pekkhati; tato cassa uttari anāvaṭaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ bhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t look all around while walking, but focuses a plough’s length in front. Beyond that he has unhindered knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So antaragharaṃ pavisanto na kāyaṃ unnāmeti, na kāyaṃ onāmeti; na kāyaṃ sannāmeti, na kāyaṃ vināmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When entering an inhabited area he keeps his body neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So nātidūre nāccāsanne āsanassa parivattati, na ca pāṇinā ālambitvā āsane nisīdati, na ca āsanasmiṃ kāyaṃ pakkhipati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He turns around neither too far nor too close to the seat. He doesn’t lean on his hand when sitting down. And he doesn’t just plonk his body down on the seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So antaraghare nisinno samāno na hatthakukkuccaṃ āpajjati, na pādakukkuccaṃ āpajjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When sitting in inhabited areas he doesn’t fidget with his hands or feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na adduvena adduvaṃ āropetvā nisīdati; na ca gopphakena gopphakaṃ āropetvā nisīdati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t sit with his knees or ankles crossed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca pāṇinā hanukaṃ upadahitvā nisīdati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t sit with his hand holding his chin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So antaraghare nisinno samāno na chambhati na kampati na vedhati na paritassati. So achambhī akampī avedhī aparitassī vigatalomahaṃso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When sitting in inhabited areas he doesn’t cower or shake or tremble or get anxious, and so he is not nervous at all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivekavatto ca so bhavaṃ gotamo antaraghare nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When sitting in inhabited areas he still practices seclusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pattodakaṃ paṭiggaṇhanto na pattaṃ unnāmeti, na pattaṃ onāmeti; na pattaṃ sannāmeti, na pattaṃ vināmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When receiving water for rinsing the bowl, he holds the bowl neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pattodakaṃ paṭiggaṇhāti nātithokaṃ nātibahuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He receives neither too little nor too much water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So na khulukhulukārakaṃ pattaṃ dhovati, na samparivattakaṃ pattaṃ dhovati, na pattaṃ bhūmiyaṃ nikkhipitvā hatthe dhovati; hatthesu dhotesu patto dhoto hoti, patte dhote hatthā dhotā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He rinses the bowl without making a sloshing noise, or spinning it around. He doesn’t put the bowl on the ground to rinse his hands; his hands and bowl are rinsed at the same time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pattodakaṃ chaḍḍeti nātidūre nāccāsanne, na ca vicchaḍḍayamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t throw the bowl rinsing water away too far or too near, or splash it about. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So odanaṃ paṭiggaṇhanto na pattaṃ unnāmeti, na pattaṃ onāmeti; na pattaṃ sannāmeti, na pattaṃ vināmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When receiving rice, he holds the bowl neither too straight nor too bent, neither too close nor too loose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So odanaṃ paṭiggaṇhāti nātithokaṃ nātibahuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He receives neither too little nor too much rice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byañjanaṃ kho pana bhavaṃ gotamo byañjanamattāya āhāreti, na ca byañjanena ālopaṃ atināmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He eats sauce in a moderate proportion, and doesn’t spend too much time saucing his portions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvattikkhattuṃ kho bhavaṃ gotamo mukhe ālopaṃ samparivattetvā ajjhoharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He chews over each portion two or three times before swallowing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na cassa kāci odanamiñjā asambhinnā kāyaṃ pavisati, na cassa kāci odanamiñjā mukhe avasiṭṭhā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But no grain of rice enters his body unchewed, and none remain in his mouth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">athāparaṃ ālopaṃ upanāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Only then does he raise another portion to his lips. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rasapaṭisaṃvedī kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo āhāraṃ āhāreti, no ca rasarāgapaṭisaṃvedī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He eats experiencing the taste, but without experiencing greed for the taste. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo āhāraṃ āhāreti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He eats food thinking of eight reasons: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">neva davāya, na madāya na maṇḍanāya na vibhūsanāya, yāvadeva imassa kāyassa ṭhitiyā yāpanāya, vihiṃsūparatiyā brahmacariyānuggahāya: ‘iti purāṇañca vedanaṃ paṭihaṅkhāmi navañca vedanaṃ na uppādessāmi, yātrā ca me bhavissati anavajjatā ca phāsuvihāro cā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will live blamelessly and at ease.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhuttāvī pattodakaṃ paṭiggaṇhanto na pattaṃ unnāmeti, na pattaṃ onāmeti; na pattaṃ sannāmeti, na pattaṃ vināmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After eating, when receiving water for washing the bowl, he holds the bowl neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pattodakaṃ paṭiggaṇhāti nātithokaṃ nātibahuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He receives neither too little nor too much water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So na khulukhulukārakaṃ pattaṃ dhovati, na samparivattakaṃ pattaṃ dhovati, na pattaṃ bhūmiyaṃ nikkhipitvā hatthe dhovati; hatthesu dhotesu patto dhoto hoti, patte dhote hatthā dhotā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He washes the bowl without making a sloshing noise, or spinning it around. He doesn’t put the bowl on the ground to wash his hands; his hands and bowl are washed at the same time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pattodakaṃ chaḍḍeti nātidūre nāccāsanne, na ca vicchaḍḍayamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t throw the bowl washing water away too far or too near, or splash it about. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhuttāvī na pattaṃ bhūmiyaṃ nikkhipati nātidūre nāccāsanne, na ca anatthiko pattena hoti, na ca ativelānurakkhī pattasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After eating he doesn’t put the bowl on the ground too far away or too close. He’s not careless with his bowl, nor does he spend too much time on it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhuttāvī muhuttaṃ tuṇhī nisīdati, na ca anumodanassa kālamatināmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After eating he sits for a while in silence, but doesn’t wait too long to give the verses of appreciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhuttāvī anumodati, na taṃ bhattaṃ garahati, na aññaṃ bhattaṃ paṭikaṅkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">After eating he expresses appreciation without criticizing the meal or expecting another one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññadatthu dhammiyā kathāya taṃ parisaṃ sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Invariably, he educates, encourages, fires up, and inspires that assembly with a Dhamma talk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ parisaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassetvā samādapetvā samuttejetvā sampahaṃsetvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he gets up from his seat and leaves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So nātisīghaṃ gacchati, nātisaṇikaṃ gacchati, na ca muccitukāmo gacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He walks neither too fast nor too slow, without wanting to get out of there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca tassa bhoto gotamassa kāye cīvaraṃ accukkaṭṭhaṃ hoti na ca accokkaṭṭhaṃ, na ca kāyasmiṃ allīnaṃ na ca kāyasmā apakaṭṭhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He wears his robe on his body neither too high nor too low, neither too tight nor too loose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca tassa bhoto gotamassa kāyamhā vāto cīvaraṃ apavahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The wind doesn’t blow his robe off his body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca tassa bhoto gotamassa kāye rajojallaṃ upalimpati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And dust and dirt don’t stick to his body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ārāmagato nisīdati paññatte āsane. Nisajja pāde pakkhāleti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he has gone to the monastery he sits on a seat spread out and washes his feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca so bhavaṃ gotamo pādamaṇḍanānuyogamanuyutto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But he doesn’t waste time with pedicures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pāde pakkhāletvā nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he has washed his feet, he sits down cross-legged, with his body straight, and establishes mindfulness right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So neva attabyābādhāya ceteti, na parabyābādhāya ceteti, na ubhayabyābādhāya ceteti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has no intention to hurt himself, hurt others, or hurt both. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attahitaparahitaubhayahitasabbalokahitameva so bhavaṃ gotamo cintento nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He only wishes for the welfare of himself, of others, of both, and of the whole world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ārāmagato parisati dhammaṃ deseti, na taṃ parisaṃ ussādeti, na taṃ parisaṃ apasādeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the monastery when he teaches Dhamma to an assembly, he neither flatters them nor rebukes them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññadatthu dhammiyā kathāya taṃ parisaṃ sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Invariably, he educates, encourages, fires up, and inspires that assembly with a Dhamma talk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato kho panassa bhoto gotamassa mukhato ghoso niccharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">His voice has eight qualities: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vissaṭṭho ca, viññeyyo ca, mañju ca, savanīyo ca, bindu ca, avisārī ca, gambhīro ca, ninnādī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it is clear, comprehensible, charming, audible, rounded, undistorted, deep, and resonant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāparisaṃ kho pana so bhavaṃ gotamo sarena viññāpeti, na cassa bahiddhā parisāya ghoso niccharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He makes sure his voice is intelligible as far as the assembly goes, but it doesn’t extend outside the assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tena bhotā gotamena dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṃsitā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamanti avalokayamānāyeva avijahitattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when they’ve been inspired with a Dhamma talk by Master Gotama they get up from their seats and leave looking back at him alone, and not forgetting their lesson. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasāma kho mayaṃ, bho, taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ gacchantaṃ, addasāma ṭhitaṃ, addasāma antaragharaṃ pavisantaṃ, addasāma antaraghare nisinnaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ, addasāma antaraghare bhuñjantaṃ, addasāma bhuttāviṃ nisinnaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ, addasāma bhuttāviṃ anumodantaṃ, addasāma ārāmaṃ gacchantaṃ, addasāma ārāmagataṃ nisinnaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ, addasāma ārāmagataṃ parisati dhammaṃ desentaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have seen Master Gotama walking and standing; entering inhabited areas, and sitting and eating there; sitting silently after eating, and expressing appreciation; going to the monastery, sitting silently there, and teaching Dhamma to an assembly there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ediso ca ediso ca so bhavaṃ gotamo, tato ca bhiyyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is Master Gotama; such he is and more than that.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, brahmāyu brāhmaṇo uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā tikkhattuṃ udānaṃ udāneti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Brahmāyu got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and uttered this aphorism three times: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appeva nāma mayaṃ kadāci karahaci tena bhotā gotamena samāgaccheyyāma? Appeva nāma siyā kocideva kathāsallāpo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hopefully, some time or other I’ll get to meet him, and we can have a discussion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā videhesu anupubbena cārikaṃ caramāno yena mithilā tadavasari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then the Buddha, traveling stage by stage in the Videhan lands, arrived at Mithilā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra sudaṃ bhagavā mithilāyaṃ viharati maghadevaambavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where he stayed in the Makhādeva Mango Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṃ kho mithileyyakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmins and householders of Mithilā heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“samaṇo khalu, bho, gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito videhesu cārikaṃ caramāno mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi mithilaṃ anuppatto, mithilāyaṃ viharati maghadevaambavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Mithilā, where he is staying in the Makhādeva Mango Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho pana bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ lokaṃ sadevakaṃ samārakaṃ sabrahmakaṃ sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiṃ pajaṃ sadevamanussaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho pana tathārūpānaṃ arahataṃ dassanaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good to see such perfected ones.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mithileyyakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā appekacce bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu; appekacce bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu, sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu; appekacce yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu; appekacce bhagavato santike nāmagottaṃ sāvetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu; appekacce tuṇhībhūtā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmins and householders of Mithilā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo: “samaṇo khalu, bho, gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito mithilaṃ anuppatto, mithilāyaṃ viharati maghadevaambavane”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmin Brahmāyu also heard that the Buddha had arrived. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo sambahulehi sāvakehi saddhiṃ yena maghadevaambavanaṃ tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So he went to the Makhādeva Mango Grove together with several disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyuno brāhmaṇassa avidūre ambavanassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not far from the grove he thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kho metaṃ patirūpaṃ yohaṃ pubbe appaṭisaṃvidito samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkameyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It wouldn’t be appropriate for me to go to see the ascetic Gotama without first letting him know.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo aññataraṃ māṇavakaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So he addressed one of his students: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi tvaṃ, māṇavaka, yena samaṇo gotamo tenupasaṅkama; upasaṅkamitvā mama vacanena samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ appābādhaṃ appātaṅkaṃ lahuṭṭhānaṃ balaṃ phāsuvihāraṃ puccha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Here, student, go to the ascetic Gotama and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘brahmāyu, bho gotama, brāhmaṇo bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ appābādhaṃ appātaṅkaṃ lahuṭṭhānaṃ balaṃ phāsuvihāraṃ pucchatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca vadehi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘brahmāyu, bho gotama, brāhmaṇo jiṇṇo vuḍḍho mahallako addhagato vayoanuppatto, vīsavassasatiko jātiyā, tiṇṇaṃ vedānaṃ pāragū sanighaṇḍukeṭubhānaṃ sākkharappabhedānaṃ itihāsapañcamānaṃ, padako, veyyākaraṇo, lokāyatamahāpurisalakkhaṇesu anavayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Master Gotama, the brahmin Brahmāyu is old, elderly, and senior, advanced in years, having reached the final stage of life; he is a hundred and twenty years old. He has mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies, ritual, phonology and etymology, and the testament as fifth. He knows philology and grammar, and is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, bho, brāhmaṇagahapatikā mithilāyaṃ paṭivasanti, brahmāyu tesaṃ brāhmaṇo aggamakkhāyati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Of all the brahmins and householders residing in Mithilā, Brahmāyu is said to be the foremost in </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadidaṃ bhogehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wealth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmāyu tesaṃ brāhmaṇo aggamakkhāyati—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadidaṃ mantehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">hymns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmāyu tesaṃ brāhmaṇo aggamakkhāyati—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadidaṃ āyunā ceva yasasā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">lifespan, and fame. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhoto gotamassa dassanakāmo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He wants to see Master Gotama.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”ti kho so māṇavako brahmāyussa brāhmaṇassa paṭissutvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” that student replied. He did as he was asked, and the Buddha said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho so māṇavako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“brahmāyu, bho gotama, brāhmaṇo bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ appābādhaṃ appātaṅkaṃ lahuṭṭhānaṃ balaṃ phāsuvihāraṃ pucchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca vadeti: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘brahmāyu, bho gotama, brāhmaṇo jiṇṇo vuḍḍho mahallako addhagato vayoanuppatto, vīsavassasatiko jātiyā, tiṇṇaṃ vedānaṃ pāragū sanighaṇḍukeṭubhānaṃ sākkharappabhedānaṃ itihāsapañcamānaṃ, padako, veyyākaraṇo, lokāyatamahāpurisalakkhaṇesu anavayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatā, bho, brāhmaṇagahapatikā mithilāyaṃ paṭivasanti, brahmāyu tesaṃ brāhmaṇo aggamakkhāyati—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadidaṃ bhogehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmāyu tesaṃ brāhmaṇo aggamakkhāyati—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadidaṃ mantehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmāyu tesaṃ brāhmaṇo aggamakkhāyati—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadidaṃ āyunā ceva yasasā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhoto gotamassa dassanakāmo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassadāni, māṇava, brahmāyu brāhmaṇo kālaṃ maññatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, student, let Brahmāyu come when he’s ready.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so māṇavako yena brahmāyu brāhmaṇo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā brahmāyuṃ brāhmaṇaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The student went back to Brahmāyu and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katāvakāso khomhi bhavatā samaṇena gotamena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your request for an audience with the ascetic Gotama has been granted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassadāni bhavaṃ kālaṃ maññatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Brahmāyu went up to the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho sā parisā brahmāyuṃ brāhmaṇaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The assembly saw him coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna oramiya okāsamakāsi yathā taṃ ñātassa yasassino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and made way for him, as he was well-known and famous. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo taṃ parisaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Brahmāyu said to that retinue, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṃ, bho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Enough, gentlemen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdatha tumhe sake āsane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please sit on your own seats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāhaṃ samaṇassa gotamassa santike nisīdissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I shall sit here by the ascetic Gotama.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Brahmāyu went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo bhagavato kāye dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni samannesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and scrutinized the Buddha’s body for the thirty-two marks of a great man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo bhagavato kāye dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yebhuyyena ṭhapetvā dve. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He saw all of them except for two, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīsu mahāpurisalakkhaṇesu kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">which he had doubts about: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosohite ca vatthaguyhe pahūtajivhatāya ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whether the private parts are retracted, and the largeness of the tongue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmāyu addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye me dvattiṃsāti sutā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have learned of the thirty-two </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahāpurisalakkhaṇā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">marks of a great man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duve tesaṃ na passāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are two that I don’t see </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhoto kāyasmiṃ gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">on the body of the ascetic Gotama. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci kosohitaṃ bhoto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Are the private parts retracted, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vatthaguyhaṃ naruttama; </span></p>
<p class="p3">O supreme person? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nārīsamānasavhayā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Though called by a word of the feminine gender, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kacci jivhā na dassakā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">perhaps your tongue is a manly one? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci pahūtajivhosi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perhaps your tongue is large, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā taṃ jāniyāmase; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as we have been informed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ninnāmayetaṃ pahūtaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please stick it out in its full extent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṅkhaṃ vinaya no ise. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and so, O hermit, dispel my doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhadhammahitatthāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For my welfare and benefit in this life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samparāyasukhāya ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and happiness in the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katāvakāsā pucchāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And I ask you to grant the opportunity </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci abhipatthitan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to ask whatever I desire.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passati kho me ayaṃ brahmāyu brāhmaṇo dvattiṃsamahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yebhuyyena ṭhapetvā dve. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmāyu sees all the marks except for two, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīsu mahāpurisalakkhaṇesu kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">which he has doubts about: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosohite ca vatthaguyhe pahūtajivhatāya cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whether the private parts are retracted, and the largeness of the tongue.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tathārūpaṃ iddhābhisaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkhāsi yathā addasa brahmāyu brāhmaṇo bhagavato kosohitaṃ vatthaguyhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha used his psychic power to will that Brahmāyu would see his retracted private parts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā jivhaṃ ninnāmetvā ubhopi kaṇṇasotāni anumasi paṭimasi; ubhopi nāsikasotāni anumasi paṭimasi; kevalampi nalāṭamaṇḍalaṃ jivhāya chādesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he stuck out his tongue and stroked back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his entire forehead with his tongue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā brahmāyuṃ brāhmaṇaṃ gāthāhi paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha replied to Brahmāyu in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te dvattiṃsāti sutā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The thirty-two marks of a great man </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahāpurisalakkhaṇā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that you have learned </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe te mama kāyasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">are all found on my body: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā te kaṅkhāhu brāhmaṇa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so do not doubt, brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhiññeyyaṃ abhiññātaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have known what should be known, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhāvetabbañca bhāvitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and developed what should be developed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahātabbaṃ pahīnaṃ me, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and given up what should be given up: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā buddhosmi brāhmaṇa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and so, brahmin, I am a Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhadhammahitatthāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For your welfare and benefit in this life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samparāyasukhāya ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and happiness in the next: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katāvakāso pucchassu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I grant you the opportunity </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci abhipatthitan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to ask whatever you desire.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyussa brāhmaṇassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmāyu thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katāvakāso khomhi samaṇena gotamena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“My request has been granted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ nu kho ahaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ puccheyyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Should I ask him about </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘diṭṭhadhammikaṃ vā atthaṃ samparāyikaṃ vā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what is beneficial in this life or the next?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyussa brāhmaṇassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kusalo kho ahaṃ diṭṭhadhammikānaṃ atthānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m well versed in the benefits that apply to this life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññepi maṃ diṭṭhadhammikaṃ atthaṃ pucchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and others ask me about this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ samparāyikaṃyeva atthaṃ puccheyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I ask the ascetic Gotama about the benefit that specifically applies to lives to come?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Brahmāyu addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ kho brāhmaṇo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How do you become a brahmin? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃ bhavati vedagū; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how do you become a knowledge master? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tevijjo bho kathaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How a master of the three knowledges? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sotthiyo kinti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is one called a scholar? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arahaṃ bho kathaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you become a perfected one? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃ bhavati kevalī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how a consummate one? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muni ca bho kathaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do you become a sage? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho kinti pavuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is one declared to be awakened?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā brahmāyuṃ brāhmaṇaṃ gāthāhi paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha replied to Brahmāyu in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbenivāsaṃ yo vedi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“One who knows their past lives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saggāpāyañca passati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sees heaven and places of loss, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho jātikkhayaṃ patto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has attained the end of rebirth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhiññā vosito muni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that sage has perfect insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ visuddhaṃ jānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know their mind is pure, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muttaṃ rāgehi sabbaso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">completely freed from greed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahīnajātimaraṇo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve given up birth and death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacariyassa kevalī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and have completed the spiritual journey. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāragū sabbadhammānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gone beyond all things, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho tādī pavuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">such a one is declared to be awakened.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, brahmāyu brāhmaṇo uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavato pādāni mukhena ca paricumbati, pāṇīhi ca parisambāhati, nāmañca sāveti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Brahmāyu got up from his seat and arranged his robe on one shoulder. He bowed with his head to the Buddha’s feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“brahmāyu ahaṃ, bho gotama, brāhmaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am the brahmin Brahmāyu, Master Gotama! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmāyu ahaṃ, bho gotama, brāhmaṇo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I am the brahmin Brahmāyu!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā parisā acchariyabbhutacittajātā ahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that assembly, their minds full of wonder and amazement, thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ vata bho, abbhutaṃ vata bho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, it’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yatra hi nāmāyaṃ brahmāyu brāhmaṇo ñāto yasassī evarūpaṃ paramanipaccakāraṃ karissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that Brahmāyu, who is so well-known and famous, should show the Buddha such utmost devotion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā brahmāyuṃ brāhmaṇaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Brahmāyu, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṃ, brāhmaṇa, uṭṭhaha nisīda tvaṃ sake āsane yato te mayi cittaṃ pasannan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Enough, brahmin. Get up, and sit in your own seat, since your mind has such confidence in me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo uṭṭhahitvā sake āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Brahmāyu got up and sat in his own seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā brahmāyussa brāhmaṇassa anupubbiṃ kathaṃ kathesi, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha taught him step by step, with </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dānakathaṃ, sīlakathaṃ, saggakathaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a talk on giving, ethical conduct, and heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmānaṃ ādīnavaṃ okāraṃ saṅkilesaṃ nekkhamme ānisaṃsaṃ pakāsesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He explained the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā bhagavā aññāsi brahmāyuṃ brāhmaṇaṃ kallacittaṃ muducittaṃ vinīvaraṇacittaṃ udaggacittaṃ pasannacittaṃ, atha yā buddhānaṃ sāmukkaṃsikā dhammadesanā taṃ pakāsesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And when the Buddha knew that Brahmāyu’s mind was ready, pliable, rid of hindrances, joyful, and confident he explained the special teaching of the Buddhas: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhaṃ, samudayaṃ, nirodhaṃ, maggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma suddhaṃ vatthaṃ apagatakāḷakaṃ sammadeva rajanaṃ paṭiggaṇheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva brahmāyussa brāhmaṇassa tasmiṃyeva āsane virajaṃ vītamalaṃ dhammacakkhuṃ udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">in that very seat the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in the brahmin Brahmāyu: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yaṃ kiñci samudayadhammaṃ sabbaṃ taṃ nirodhadhamman”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Everything that has a beginning has an end.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo diṭṭhadhammo pattadhammo viditadhammo pariyogāḷhadhammo tiṇṇavicikiccho vigatakathaṅkatho vesārajjappatto aparappaccayo satthusāsane bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmāyu saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. He went beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and independent of others regarding the Teacher’s instructions. He said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho gotama, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā gotamena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsetu ca me bhavaṃ gotamo svātanāya bhattaṃ saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṅghenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Would you and the mendicant Saṅgha please accept a meal from me tomorrow?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo bhagavato adhivāsanaṃ viditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Brahmāyu got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo tassā rattiyā accayena sake nivesane paṇītaṃ khādanīyaṃ bhojanīyaṃ paṭiyādāpetvā bhagavato kālaṃ ārocāpesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when the night had passed Brahmāyu had a variety of delicious foods prepared in his own home. Then he had the Buddha informed of the time, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kālo, bho gotama, niṭṭhitaṃ bhattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s time, Master Gotama, the meal is ready.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena brahmāyussa brāhmaṇassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṅghena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the brahmin Brahmāyu, where he sat on the seat spread out, together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo sattāhaṃ buddhappamukhaṃ bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappesi sampavāresi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Brahmāyu served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with his own hands with a variety of delicious foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassa sattāhassa accayena videhesu cārikaṃ pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A week later, the Buddha departed to wander in the Videhan lands. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmāyu brāhmaṇo acirapakkantassa bhagavato kālamakāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not long after the Buddha left, Brahmāyu passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“brahmāyu, bhante, brāhmaṇo kālaṅkato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Brahmāyu has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kā gati, ko abhisamparāyo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where has he been reborn in his next life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṇḍito, bhikkhave, brahmāyu brāhmaṇo paccapādi dhammassānudhammaṃ, na ca maṃ dhammādhikaraṇaṃ vihesesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the brahmin Brahmāyu was astute. He practiced in line with the teachings, and did not trouble me about the teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmāyu, bhikkhave, brāhmaṇo pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko hoti, tattha parinibbāyī, anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters, he’s been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmāyusuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
