<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn098-Vāseṭṭhasutta  - With Vāseṭṭha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Vāseṭṭhasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">With Vāseṭṭha </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 98  - Middle Discourses 98 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā icchānaṅgale viharati icchānaṅgalavanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in a forest near Icchānaṅgala. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā abhiññātā abhiññātā brāhmaṇamahāsālā icchānaṅgale paṭivasanti, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time several very well-known well-to-do brahmins were residing in Icchānaṅgala. They included </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">caṅkī brāhmaṇo, tārukkho brāhmaṇo, pokkharasāti brāhmaṇo, jāṇussoṇi brāhmaṇo, todeyyo brāhmaṇo, aññe ca abhiññātā abhiññātā brāhmaṇamahāsālā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the brahmins Caṅkī, Tārukkha, Pokkharasāti, Jāṇussoṇi, Todeyya, and others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vāseṭṭhabhāradvājānaṃ māṇavānaṃ jaṅghāvihāraṃ anucaṅkamantānaṃ anuvicarantānaṃ ayamantarākathā udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then as the brahmin students Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja were going for a walk they began to discussion the question of </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ, bho, brāhmaṇo hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">how one is a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāradvājo māṇavo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bhāradvāja said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yato kho, bho, ubhato sujāto mātito ca pitito ca saṃsuddhagahaṇiko yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā akkhitto anupakkuṭṭho jātivādena—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When you’re well born on both your mother’s and father’s side, of pure descent, irrefutable and impeccable in questions of ancestry back to the seventh paternal generation—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā kho, bho, brāhmaṇo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then you’re a brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāseṭṭho māṇavo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Vāseṭṭha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yato kho, bho, sīlavā ca hoti vattasampanno ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When you’re ethical and accomplished in doing your duties—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā kho, bho, brāhmaṇo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then you’re a brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva kho asakkhi bhāradvājo māṇavo vāseṭṭhaṃ māṇavaṃ saññāpetuṃ, na pana asakkhi vāseṭṭho māṇavo bhāradvājaṃ māṇavaṃ saññāpetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But neither was able to persuade the other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vāseṭṭho māṇavo bhāradvājaṃ māṇavaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Vāseṭṭha said to Bhāradvāja, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho, bho bhāradvāja, samaṇo gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito icchānaṅgale viharati icchānaṅgalavanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Bhāradvāja, the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—is staying in a forest near Icchānaṅgala. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho pana bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyāma, bho bhāradvāja, yena samaṇo gotamo tenupasaṅkamissāma; upasaṅkamitvā samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ etamatthaṃ pucchissāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Come, let’s go to see him and ask him about this matter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā no samaṇo gotamo byākarissati tathā naṃ dhāressāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As he answers, so we’ll remember it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”ti kho bhāradvājo māṇavo vāseṭṭhassa māṇavassa paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Bhāradvāja. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vāseṭṭhabhāradvājā māṇavā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they went to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho vāseṭṭho māṇavo bhagavantaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and Vāseṭṭha addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anuññātapaṭiññātā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“We’re both authorized masters </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tevijjā mayamasmubho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of the three Vedas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ pokkharasātissa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m a student of Pokkharasāti, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tārukkhassāyaṃ māṇavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he of Tārukkha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tevijjānaṃ yadakkhātaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We’re fully qualified </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra kevalinosmase; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in all the Vedic experts teach. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Padakasmā veyyākaraṇā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As philologists and grammarians, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jappe ācariyasādisā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">we match our teachers in recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ no jātivādasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We have a dispute </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivādo atthi gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">regarding the question of ancestry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātiyā brāhmaṇo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For Bhāradvāja says that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhāradvājo iti bhāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">one is a brahmin due to birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañca kammunā brūmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">but I declare it’s because of one’s actions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ jānāhi cakkhuma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Oh seer, know this as our debate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te na sakkoma ñāpetuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since neither of us was able </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññaṃ mayaṃ ubho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to convince the other, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavantaṃ puṭṭhumāgamā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">we’ve come to ask you, sir, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambuddhaṃ iti vissutaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so renowned as the awakened one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Candaṃ yathā khayātītaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As people honor with joined palms </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pecca pañjalikā janā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the moon on the cusp of waxing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vandamānā namassanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">bowing, they revere </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lokasmiṃ gotamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gotama in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuṃ loke samuppannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We ask this of Gotama, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mayaṃ pucchāma gotamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the eye arisen in the world: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātiyā brāhmaṇo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is one a brahmin due to birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">udāhu bhavati kammunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or else because of actions? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajānataṃ no pabrūhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We don’t know, please tell us, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā jānemu brāhmaṇan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so that we can know a brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tesaṃ vo ahaṃ byakkhissaṃ, (vāseṭṭhāti bhagavā) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I shall explain to you,” said the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupubbaṃ yathātathaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“accurately and in sequence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātivibhaṅgaṃ pāṇānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the taxonomy of living creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññamaññāhi jātiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for species are indeed diverse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiṇarukkhepi jānātha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Know the grass and trees, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na cāpi paṭijānare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">though they lack self-awareness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Liṅgaṃ jātimayaṃ tesaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re defined by their birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññā hi jātiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for species are indeed diverse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato kīṭe paṭaṅge ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next there are bugs and moths, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāva kunthakipillike; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and so on, to ants and termites. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Liṅgaṃ jātimayaṃ tesaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re defined by their birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññā hi jātiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for species are indeed diverse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catuppadepi jānātha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Know the quadrupeds, too, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khuddake ca mahallake; </span></p>
<p class="p3">both small and large. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Liṅgaṃ jātimayaṃ tesaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re defined by their birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññā hi jātiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for species are indeed diverse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pādudarepi jānātha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Know, too, the long-backed snakes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">urage dīghapiṭṭhike; </span></p>
<p class="p3">crawling on their bellies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Liṅgaṃ jātimayaṃ tesaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re defined by their birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññā hi jātiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for species are indeed diverse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato macchepi jānātha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next know the fish, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">udake vārigocare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose habitat is the water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Liṅgaṃ jātimayaṃ tesaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re defined by their birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññā hi jātiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for species are indeed diverse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato pakkhīpi jānātha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next know the birds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pattayāne vihaṅgame; </span></p>
<p class="p3">flying with wings as chariots. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Liṅgaṃ jātimayaṃ tesaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re defined by their birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññā hi jātiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for species are indeed diverse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā etāsu jātīsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">While the differences between these species </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">liṅgaṃ jātimayaṃ puthu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are defined by their birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ natthi manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the differences between humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">liṅgaṃ jātimayaṃ puthu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are not defined by their birth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kesehi na sīsehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not by hair nor by head, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kaṇṇehi na akkhīhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by ear nor by eye, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na mukhena na nāsāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by mouth nor by nose, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na oṭṭhehi bhamūhi vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by lips nor by eyebrow, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na gīvāya na aṃsehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by shoulder nor by neck, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na udarena na piṭṭhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by belly nor by back, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na soṇiyā na urasā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by buttocks nor by breast, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sambādhe na methune. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by genitals nor by groin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hatthehi na pādehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by hands nor by feet, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">naṅgulīhi nakhehi vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by fingers nor by nails, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na jaṅghāhi na ūrūhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by knees nor by thighs, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vaṇṇena sarena vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">not by color nor by voice: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Liṅgaṃ jātimayaṃ neva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">none of these are defined by birth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā aññāsu jātisu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as it is for other species. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paccattañca sarīresu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In individual human bodies </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussesvetaṃ na vijjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you can’t find such distinctions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vokārañca manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The distinctions among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaññāya pavuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are spoken of by convention. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gorakkhaṃ upajīvati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who lives off keeping cattle: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vāseṭṭha jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know them, Vāseṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kassako so na brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a farmer, not a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puthusippena jīvati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who lives off various professions: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vāseṭṭha jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know them, Vāseṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sippiko so na brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a professional, not a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vohāraṃ upajīvati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who lives off trade: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vāseṭṭha jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know them, Vāseṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāṇijo so na brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a trader, not a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parapessena jīvati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who lives off serving others: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vāseṭṭha jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know them, Vāseṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pessako so na brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as an employee, not a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adinnaṃ upajīvati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who lives off stealing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vāseṭṭha jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know them, Vāseṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">coro eso na brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a bandit, not a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">issatthaṃ upajīvati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who lives off archery: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vāseṭṭha jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know them, Vāseṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yodhājīvo na brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a soldier, not a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">porohiccena jīvati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who lives off priesthood: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vāseṭṭha jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know them, Vāseṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yājako so na brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a sacrificer, not a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone among humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāmaṃ raṭṭhañca bhuñjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who taxes village and nation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vāseṭṭha jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know them, Vāseṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā eso na brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a ruler, not a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāhaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ brūmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t call someone a brahmin </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yonijaṃ mattisambhavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">after the mother or womb they came from. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhovādi nāma so hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they still have attachments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace hoti sakiñcano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re just someone who says ‘sir’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiñcanaṃ anādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">One with nothing, by not grasping: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbasaṃyojanaṃ chetvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having cut off all fetters </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo ve na paritassati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they have no anxiety. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgātigaṃ visaṃyuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve got over clinging, and are detached: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chetvā naddhiṃ varattañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve cut the strap and harness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sandānaṃ sahanukkamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the reins and bridle too, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhittapalighaṃ buddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with cross-bar lifted, they’re awakened: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkosaṃ vadhabandhañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Abuse, killing, caging: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aduṭṭho yo titikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they endure these without anger. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khantībalaṃ balānīkaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Patience is their powerful army: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkodhanaṃ vatavantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not irritable or stuck up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlavantaṃ anussadaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">dutiful in precepts and observances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dantaṃ antimasārīraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">tamed, bearing their final body: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāripokkharapatteva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Like rain off a lotus leaf, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraggeriva sāsapo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a mustard seed off the point of a pin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo na limpati kāmesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sensual pleasures slide off them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dukkhassa pajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand for themselves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idheva khayamattano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in this life the end of suffering; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pannabhāraṃ visaṃyuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with burden put down, detached: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gambhīrapaññaṃ medhāviṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Deep in wisdom, intelligent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maggāmaggassa kovidaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">expert in the variety of paths; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttamatthamanuppattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">arrived at the highest goal: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṃsaṭṭhaṃ gahaṭṭhehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Socializing with neither </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgārehi cūbhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">householders nor the homeless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anokasārimappicchaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A migrant without a shelter, few in wishes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nidhāya daṇḍaṃ bhūtesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve laid down the rod </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasesu thāvaresu ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">against creatures firm and frail; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo na hanti na ghāteti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t kill or cause to kill: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aviruddhaṃ viruddhesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not fighting among those who fight, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attadaṇḍesu nibbutaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re extinguished among those who’ve taken up arms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādānesu anādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not grasping among those who grasp: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa rāgo ca doso ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve discarded greed and hate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māno makkho ca ohito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">conceit and denigration, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāsaporiva āraggā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a mustard seed off the point of a pin: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akakkasaṃ viññāpaniṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The words they utter </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">giraṃ saccaṃ udīraye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are sweet, informative, and true, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāya nābhisajje kiñci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and don’t offend anyone: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca dīghaṃ va rassaṃ vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t steal anything in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṇuṃ thūlaṃ subhāsubhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">long or short, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Loke adinnaṃ nādeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">fine or coarse, beautiful or ugly: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsā yassa na vijjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have no hope </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asmiṃ loke paramhi ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for this world or the next; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirāsāsaṃ visaṃyuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">free of hope, detached: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassālayā na vijjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have no clinging, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāya akathaṅkathiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowledge has freed them of indecision, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amatogadhaṃ anuppattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve arrived at the culmination of the deathless: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yodhapuññañca pāpañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve escaped clinging </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho saṅgaṃ upaccagā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to both good and bad deeds; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asokaṃ virajaṃ suddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sorrowless, stainless, pure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Candaṃ va vimalaṃ suddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pure as the spotless moon, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vippasannaṃ anāvilaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">clear and undisturbed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandībhavaparikkhīṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve ended desire to be reborn: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo imaṃ palipathaṃ duggaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve got past this grueling swamp </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃsāraṃ mohamaccagā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of delusion, transmigration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiṇṇo pāraṅgato jhāyī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve crossed over to the far shore, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anejo akathaṅkathī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">stilled and free of indecision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupādāya nibbuto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re extinguished by not grasping: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yodhakāme pahantvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve given up sensual stimulations, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgāro paribbaje; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and have gone forth from lay life; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmabhavaparikkhīṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve ended rebirth in the sensual realm: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yodhataṇhaṃ pahantvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve given up craving, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgāro paribbaje; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and have gone forth from lay life; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhābhavaparikkhīṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve ended craving to be reborn: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hitvā mānusakaṃ yogaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve given up human bonds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dibbaṃ yogaṃ upaccagā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and gone beyond heavenly bonds; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbayogavisaṃyuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">detached from all attachments: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hitvā ratiñca aratiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve given up liking and disliking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sītībhūtaṃ nirūpadhiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re cooled and free of attachments; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbalokābhibhuṃ vīraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a hero, master of the whole world: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cutiṃ yo vedi sattānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know the passing away </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upapattiñca sabbaso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and rebirth of all beings; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asattaṃ sugataṃ buddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">unattached, holy, awakened: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa gatiṃ na jānanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gods, fairies, and humans </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devā gandhabbamānusā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t know their destiny; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavaṃ arahantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the perfected ones with defilements ended: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa pure ca pacchā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have nothing before or after, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhe ca natthi kiñcanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or even in between; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiñcanaṃ anādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">one with nothing, by not grasping: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Usabhaṃ pavaraṃ vīraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Leader of the herd, excellent hero, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahesiṃ vijitāvinaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">great hermit and victor; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anejaṃ nhātakaṃ buddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">unstirred, washed, awakened: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbenivāsaṃ yo vedi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know their past lives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saggāpāyañca passati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and see heaven and places of loss, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho jātikkhayaṃ patto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and have attained the end of rebirth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who I call a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaññā hesā lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For name and clan are assigned </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmagottaṃ pakappitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as mere convention in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammuccā samudāgataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Arising by mutual agreement, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha tattha pakappitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re assigned to each individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīgharattānusayitaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a long time this misconception </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhigatamajānataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">has prejudiced those who don’t understand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajānantā no pabrunti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorant, they declare </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātiyā hoti brāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that one is a brahmin by birth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na jaccā brāhmaṇo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re not a brahmin by birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jaccā hoti abrāhmaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor by birth a non-brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammunā brāhmaṇo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re a brahmin by your deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammunā hoti abrāhmaṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and by deeds a non-brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassako kammunā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re a farmer by your deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sippiko hoti kammunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by deeds you’re a professional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāṇijo kammunā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re a trader by your deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pessako hoti kammunā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by deeds are you an employee; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Coropi kammunā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re a bandit by your deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yodhājīvopi kammunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by deeds you’re a soldier; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yājako kammunā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re a sacrificer by your deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājāpi hoti kammunā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by deeds you’re a ruler. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way in accord with truth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammaṃ passanti paṇḍitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the astute regard deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiccasamuppādadassā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing dependent origination, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammavipākakovidā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re expert in deeds and their results. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammunā vattati loko, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Deeds make the world go on, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammunā vattati pajā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">deeds make people go on; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammanibandhanā sattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sentient beings are bound by deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rathassāṇīva yāyato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a moving chariot’s linchpin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tapena brahmacariyena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By austerity and spiritual practice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃyamena damena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by restraint and by taming: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etena brāhmaṇo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s how to become a brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etaṃ brāhmaṇamuttamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the supreme brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhi vijjāhi sampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Accomplished in the three knowledges, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santo khīṇapunabbhavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">peaceful, with rebirth ended, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vāseṭṭha jānāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">know them, Vāseṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmā sakko vijānatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as Brahmā and Sakka to the wise.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, vāseṭṭhabhāradvājā māṇavā bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho gotama, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā gotamena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete mayaṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāma dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">We go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsake no bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gate”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāseṭṭhasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
