<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.35-35. Ujjhānasaññisutta  - 35. Disdain </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.35. 35. Ujjhānasaññisutta  - 35. Disdain </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Satullapakāyikavagga  - 4. The Satullapa Group </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā ujjhānasaññikā devatāyo abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā vehāsaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, several glorious deities of the Disdainful Group, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, and stood in the air. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vehāsaṃ ṭhitā kho ekā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Standing in the air, one deity recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññathā santamattānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Someone who pretends </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññathā yo pavedaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to be other than they really are, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikacca kitavasseva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is like a cheating gambler </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhuttaṃ theyyena tassa taṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who enjoys what was gained by theft. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi kayirā tañhi vade, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should only say what you would do; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ na kayirā na taṃ vade; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you shouldn’t say what you wouldn’t do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akarontaṃ bhāsamānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The wise will recognize </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parijānanti paṇḍitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one who talks without doing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na yidaṃ bhāsitamattena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Not just by speaking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekantasavanena vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor solely by listening, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anukkamitave sakkā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">are you able to progress </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāyaṃ paṭipadā daḷhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">on this hard path, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāya dhīrā pamuccanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">by which wise ones practicing absorption </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jhāyino mārabandhanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are released from Māra’s bonds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ve dhīrā pakubbanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The wise certainly don’t act like that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viditvā lokapariyāyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for they understand the ways of the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāya nibbutā dhīrā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The wise are extinguished by understanding, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇā loke visattikan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve crossed over clinging to the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā devatāyo pathaviyaṃ patiṭṭhahitvā bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those deities landed on the ground, bowed with their heads at the Buddha’s feet and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“accayo no, bhante, accagamā yathābālaṃ yathāmūḷhaṃ yathāakusalaṃ, yā mayaṃ bhagavantaṃ āsādetabbaṃ amaññimhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“We have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of us to imagine we could attack the Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāsaṃ no, bhante, bhagavā accayaṃ accayato paṭiggaṇhātu āyatiṃ saṃvarāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, sir, accept our mistake for what it is, so we will restrain ourselves in future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sitaṃ pātvākāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that, the Buddha smiled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā devatāyo bhiyyoso mattāya ujjhāyantiyo vehāsaṃ abbhuggañchuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those deities, becoming even more disdainful, flew up in the air. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">One deity recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Accayaṃ desayantīnaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If you don’t give your pardon </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo ce na paṭigaṇhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">when a mistake is confessed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kopantaro dosagaru, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with hidden anger and heavy hate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sa veraṃ paṭimuñcatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re stuck in your enmity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Accayo ce na vijjetha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If no mistake is found, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nocidhāpagataṃ siyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if no-one’s gone astray, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Verāni na ca sammeyyuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and enmities are settled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kenīdha kusalo siyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then who could have been unskillful?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kassaccayā na vijjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who makes no mistakes? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kassa natthi apāgataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who doesn’t go astray? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko na sammohamāpādi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who doesn’t fall into confusion? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko ca dhīro sadā sato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the wise one that’s ever mindful?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathāgatassa buddhassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Realized One, the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbabhūtānukampino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">compassionate for all beings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassaccayā na vijjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s who makes no mistakes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa natthi apāgataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that’s who doesn’t go astray. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So na sammohamāpādi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He doesn’t fall into confusion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sova dhīro sadā satoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for he’s the wise one, ever mindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accayaṃ desayantīnaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t give your pardon </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo ce na paṭigaṇhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">when a mistake is confessed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kopantaro dosagaru, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with hidden anger and heavy hate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sa veraṃ paṭimuñcati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re stuck in your enmity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ veraṃ nābhinandāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t approve of such enmity, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭiggaṇhāmi voccayan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and so I pardon your mistake.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
