<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.02-2. Nimokkhasutta  - 2. Liberation </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.02. 2. Nimokkhasutta  - 2. Liberation </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Naḷavagga  - 1. A Reed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññatarā devatā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho sā devatā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jānāsi no tvaṃ, mārisa, sattānaṃ nimokkhaṃ pamokkhaṃ vivekan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good sir, do you understand liberation, emancipation, and seclusion for sentient beings?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jānāmi khvāhaṃ, āvuso, sattānaṃ nimokkhaṃ pamokkhaṃ vivekan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I do, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathākathaṃ pana tvaṃ, mārisa, jānāsi sattānaṃ nimokkhaṃ pamokkhaṃ vivekan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how is it that you understand liberation, emancipation, and seclusion for sentient beings?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nandībhavaparikkhayā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“With the ending of relish for rebirth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññāviññāṇasaṅkhayā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the finishing of perception and consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanānaṃ nirodhā upasamā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the cessation and stilling of feelings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ khvāhaṃ āvuso jānāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that, sir, is how I understand liberation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattānaṃ nimokkhaṃ pamokkhaṃ vivekan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">emancipation, and seclusion for sentient beings.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
