<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.36-36. Saddhāsutta  - 36. Faith </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.36. 36. Saddhāsutta  - 36. Faith </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Satullapakāyikavagga  - 4. The Satullapa Group </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā satullapakāyikā devatāyo abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, several glorious deities of the Satullapa Group, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho ekā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Standing to one side, one deity recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddhā dutiyā purisassa hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Faith is a person’s partner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce assaddhiyaṃ avatiṭṭhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If faithlessness doesn’t linger, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaso ca kittī ca tatvassa hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">fame and renown are theirs, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saggañca so gacchati sarīraṃ vihāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and when they discard this corpse they go to heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity recited these verses in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kodhaṃ jahe vippajaheyya mānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give up anger, get rid of conceit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojanaṃ sabbamatikkameyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and get past all the fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ nāmarūpasmimasajjamānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Clingings don’t torment one who has nothing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiñcanaṃ nānupatanti saṅgā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not clinging to name and form.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pamādamanuyuñjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Fools and unintelligent people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bālā dummedhino janā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">devote themselves to negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamādañca medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the intelligent protect diligence </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhanaṃ seṭṭhaṃva rakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as their best treasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā pamādamanuyuñjetha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t devote yourself to negligence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā kāmarati santhavaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or delight in sexual intimacy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamatto hi jhāyanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For if you’re diligent and practice absorption, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pappoti paramaṃ sukhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll attain the highest happiness.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
