<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.37-37. Samayasutta  - 37. The Congregation </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.37. 37. Samayasutta  - 37. The Congregation </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Satullapakāyikavagga  - 4. The Satullapa Group </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ mahāvane mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi sabbeheva arahantehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Great Wood, together with a large Saṅgha of around five hundred mendicants, all of whom were perfected ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasahi ca lokadhātūhi devatā yebhuyyena sannipatitā honti bhagavantaṃ dassanāya bhikkhusaṃghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And most of the deities from ten solar systems had gathered to see the Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho catunnaṃ suddhāvāsakāyikānaṃ devatānaṃ etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then four deities of the Pure Abodes, aware of what was happening, thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ mahāvane mahatā bhikkhusaṃghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi sabbeheva arahantehi; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasahi ca lokadhātūhi devatā yebhuyyena sannipatitā honti bhagavantaṃ dassanāya bhikkhusaṃghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūna mayampi yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkameyyāma; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato santike paccekaṃ gāthaṃ bhāseyyāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why don’t we go to the Buddha and each recite a verse in his presence?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā devatā—seyyathāpi nāma balavā puriso samiñjitaṃ vā bāhaṃ pasāreyya pasāritaṃ vā bāhaṃ samiñjeyya; evameva—suddhāvāsesu devesu antarahitā bhagavato purato pāturahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, they vanished from the Pure Abodes and reappeared in front of the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā devatā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They bowed to the Buddha and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho ekā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Standing to one side, one deity recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mahāsamayo pavanasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s a great congregation in the woods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devakāyā samāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a host of gods have assembled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āgatamha imaṃ dhammasamayaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We’ve come to this righteous congregation </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dakkhitāye aparājitasaṅghan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to see the invincible Saṅgha!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tatra bhikkhavo samādahaṃsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The mendicants there have immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittamattano ujukaṃ akaṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve straightened out their own minds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sārathīva nettāni gahetvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Like a charioteer who has taken the reins, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indriyāni rakkhanti paṇḍitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the astute ones protect their senses.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chetvā khīlaṃ chetvā palighaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Having cut the stake and cut the bar, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Indakhīlaṃ ūhacca manejā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re unstirred, with boundary post uprooted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te caranti suddhā vimalā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They live pure and immaculate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhumatā sudantā susunāgā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the young dragons tamed by the seer.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye keci buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gatāse, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Anyone who has gone to the Buddha for refuge </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na te gamissanti apāyabhūmiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">won’t go to a plane of loss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahāya mānusaṃ dehaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up this human body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devakāyaṃ paripūressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they swell the hosts of gods.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
