<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.01-1. Oghataraṇasutta  - 1. Crossing the Flood </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.01. 1. Oghataraṇasutta  - 1. Crossing the Flood </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Naḷavagga  - 1. A Reed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññatarā devatā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho sā devatā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṃ nu tvaṃ, mārisa, oghamatarī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good sir, how did you cross the flood?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appatiṭṭhaṃ khvāhaṃ, āvuso, anāyūhaṃ oghamatarin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Neither standing nor swimming, sir, I crossed the flood.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathākathaṃ pana tvaṃ, mārisa, appatiṭṭhaṃ anāyūhaṃ oghamatarī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But in what way did you cross the flood neither standing nor swimming?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yadāsvāhaṃ, āvuso, santiṭṭhāmi tadāssu saṃsīdāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When I stood still, I went under. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadāsvāhaṃ, āvuso, āyūhāmi tadāssu nibbuyhāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when I swam, I was swept away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ khvāhaṃ, āvuso, appatiṭṭhaṃ anāyūhaṃ oghamatarin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how I crossed the flood neither standing nor swimming.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cirassaṃ vata passāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“After a long time I see </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brāhmaṇaṃ parinibbutaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a brahmin extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appatiṭṭhaṃ anāyūhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Neither standing nor swimming, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇṇaṃ loke visattikan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’s crossed over clinging to the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca sā devatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is what that deity said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanuñño satthā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teacher approved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā devatā: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“samanuñño me satthā”ti bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that deity, knowing that the teacher approved, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
