<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.32-32. Maccharisutta  - 32. Stinginess </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.32. 32. Maccharisutta  - 32. Stinginess </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Satullapakāyikavagga  - 4. The Satullapa Group </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā satullapakāyikā devatāyo abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, several glorious deities of the Satullapa Group, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho ekā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Standing to one side, one deity recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Maccherā ca pamādā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because of stinginess and negligence </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ dānaṃ na dīyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a gift is not given. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññaṃ ākaṅkhamānena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wanting merit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">deyyaṃ hoti vijānatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a smart person would give.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity recited these verses in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yasseva bhīto na dadāti maccharī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a miser fails to give because of fear, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadevādadato bhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the very thing they’re afraid of comes to pass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jighacchā ca pipāsā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The hunger and thirst </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa bhāyati maccharī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that a miser fears </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tameva bālaṃ phusati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">hurt the fool </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asmiṃ loke paramhi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in this world and the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā vineyya maccheraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should dispel stinginess, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dajjā dānaṃ malābhibhū; </span></p>
<p class="p3">overcoming that stain, and give a gift. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññāni paralokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The good deeds of sentient beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">patiṭṭhā honti pāṇinan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">support them in the next world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity recited these verses in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te matesu na mīyanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Among the dead they do not die, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">panthānaṃva sahabbajaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who, like fellow travelers on the road, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appasmiṃ ye pavecchanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">are happy to provide, though they have but little. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">esa dhammo sanantano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is an ancient principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appasmeke pavecchanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some who have little are happy to provide, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahuneke na dicchare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">while some who have much don’t wish to give. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appasmā dakkhiṇā dinnā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An offering given from little </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sahassena samaṃ mitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is multiplied a thousand times.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity recited these verses in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Duddadaṃ dadamānānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Giving what’s hard to give, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaraṃ kamma kubbataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">doing what’s hard to do; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asanto nānukubbanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the wicked don’t act like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sataṃ dhammo duranvayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the teaching of the good is hard to follow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā satañca asataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the virtuous and the wicked </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nānā hoti ito gati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">have different destinations after leaving this place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asanto nirayaṃ yanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The wicked go to hell, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santo saggaparāyanā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while the virtuous are bound for heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavato santike etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kassa nu kho, bhagavā, subhāsitan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, who has spoken well?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sabbāsaṃ vo subhāsitaṃ pariyāyena; api ca mamapi suṇātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’ve all spoken well in your own way. However, listen to me also: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaṃ care yopi samuñjakaṃ care, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A hundred thousand people making a thousand sacrifices </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dārañca posaṃ dadamappakasmiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">isn’t worth a fraction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sataṃ sahassānaṃ sahassayāginaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">of one who lives rightly, wandering for gleanings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalampi nāgghanti tathāvidhassa te”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or one who supports their partner from what little they have.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aparā devatā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then another deity addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kenesa yañño vipulo mahaggato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why doesn’t that sacrifice of theirs, so abundant and magnificent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samena dinnassa na agghameti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">equal the value of a moral person’s gift? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ sataṃ sahassānaṃ sahassayāginaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is it that a hundred thousand people making a thousand sacrifices </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalampi nāgghanti tathāvidhassa te”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">isn’t worth a fraction of what’s offered by such a person?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dadanti heke visame niviṭṭhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Some give based on immorality—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chetvā vadhitvā atha socayitvā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">after injuring, killing, and tormenting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā dakkhiṇā assumukhā sadaṇḍā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such an offering—tearful, violent—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samena dinnassa na agghameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in no way equals the value of a moral person’s gift. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ sataṃ sahassānaṃ sahassayāginaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how it is that a hundred thousand people making a thousand sacrifices </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalampi nāgghanti tathāvidhassa te”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">isn’t worth a fraction of what’s offered by such a person.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
