<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.34-34. Nasantisutta  - 34. There Are None </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.34. 34. Nasantisutta  - 34. There Are None </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Satullapakāyikavagga  - 4. The Satullapa Group </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā satullapakāyikā devatāyo abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, several glorious deities of the Satullapa Group, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho ekā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Standing to one side, one deity recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na santi kāmā manujesu niccā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Among humans there are no sensual pleasures that are permanent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santīdha kamanīyāni yesu baddho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here there are sensuous things, bound to which, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesu pamatto apunāgamanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">drunk on which, there’s no coming back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgantā puriso maccudheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That person doesn’t return here from Death’s domain.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chandajaṃ aghaṃ chandajaṃ dukkhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Misery is born of desire; suffering is born of desire; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandavinayā aghavinayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">when desire is removed, misery is removed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aghavinayā dukkhavinayo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when misery is removed, suffering is removed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na te kāmā yāni citrāni loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The world’s pretty things aren’t sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkapparāgo purisassa kāmo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greedy intention is a person’s sensual pleasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiṭṭhanti citrāni tatheva loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The world’s pretty things stay just as they are, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athettha dhīrā vinayanti chandaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but a wise one removes desire for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhaṃ jahe vippajaheyya mānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should give up anger and get rid of conceit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojanaṃ sabbamatikkameyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and get past all the fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ nāmarūpasmimasajjamānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sufferings don’t torment the one who has nothing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiñcanaṃ nānupatanti dukkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not clinging to name and form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahāsi saṅkhaṃ na vimānamajjhagā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Judging’s given up, conceit rejected; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchecchi taṇhaṃ idha nāmarūpe; </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving for name and form is cut off right here. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ chinnaganthaṃ anighaṃ nirāsaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve cut the ties, untroubled and free of hope. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariyesamānā nājjhagamuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Though gods and humans search for them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devā manussā idha vā huraṃ vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">in this world and the world beyond, they never find them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saggesu vā sabbanivesanesū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not in heaven nor in any abode.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tañce hi nāddakkhuṃ tathāvimuttaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If neither gods nor humans see one freed in this way,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(iccāyasmā mogharājā) </span></p>
<p class="p3">said Venerable Mogharāja, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devā manussā idha vā huraṃ vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“in this world or the world beyond, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naruttamaṃ atthacaraṃ narānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">are those who revere that supreme person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye taṃ namassanti pasaṃsiyā te”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who lives for the good of mankind, also worthy of praise?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pasaṃsiyā tepi bhavanti bhikkhū, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The mendicants who revere one freed in this way,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(mogharājāti bhagavā) </span></p>
<p class="p3">said the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye taṃ namassanti tathāvimuttaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“are also worthy of praise, Mogharāja. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāya dhammaṃ vicikicchaṃ pahāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But having understood the teaching and given up doubt, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgātigā tepi bhavanti bhikkhū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those mendicants can get over clinging.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
