<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>1.39-39. Paṭhamapajjunnadhītusutta  - 39. With Pajjunna’s Daughter (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">1.39. 39. Paṭhamapajjunnadhītusutta  - 39. With Pajjunna’s Daughter (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Satullapakāyikavagga  - 4. The Satullapa Group </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kokanadā pajjunnassa dhītā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ mahāvanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the beautiful Kokanadā, Pajjunna’s daughter, lighting up the entire Great Wood, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho sā devatā kokanadā pajjunnassa dhītā bhagavato santike imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and recited these verses in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vesāliyaṃ vane viharantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Staying in the woods of Vesālī </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggaṃ sattassa sambuddhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is the Buddha, best of beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kokanadāhamasmi abhivande, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Kokanadā am I who worships him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kokanadā pajjunnassa dhītā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Kokanadā, Pajjuna’s daughter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutameva pure āsi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Previously I had only heard </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammo cakkhumatānubuddho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching realized by the seer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāhaṃ dāni sakkhi jānāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But now I know it as a witness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Munino desayato sugatassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">while the sage, the Holy One teaches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci ariyaṃ dhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are unintelligent people who go about </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahantā caranti dummedhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">denouncing the noble teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upenti roruvaṃ ghoraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They fall into the terrible Hell of Screams </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cirarattaṃ dukkhaṃ anubhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where they suffer long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho ariye dhamme, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are those who have found acceptance and peace </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khantiyā upasamena upetā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the noble teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahāya mānusaṃ dehaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up this human body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devakāyaṃ paripūressantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they swell the hosts of gods.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
