<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.04-4. Maṇibhaddasutta  - 4. With Maṇibhadda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.04. 4. Maṇibhaddasutta  - 4. With Maṇibhadda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Indakavagga  - 1. With Indaka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā magadhesu viharati maṇimālike cetiye maṇibhaddassa yakkhassa bhavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Magadhans at the Maṇimālika tree shrine, the haunt of the native spirit Maṇibhadda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho maṇibhaddo yakkho yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the native spirit Maṇibhadda went up to the Buddha, and recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satīmato sadā bhaddaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s always auspicious for the mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satimā sukhamedhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mindful prosper in happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satīmato suve seyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Each new day is better for the mindful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">verā ca parimuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they’re freed from enmity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satīmato sadā bhaddaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s always auspicious for the mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satimā sukhamedhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mindful prosper in happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satīmato suve seyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Each new day is better for the mindful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">verā na parimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but they’re not freed from enmity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa sabbamahorattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But someone whose mind delights in harmlessness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahiṃsāya rato mano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">all day and all night, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mettaṃso sabbabhūtesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with love for all living creatures—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">veraṃ tassa na kenacī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they have no enmity for anyone.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
