<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.03-3. Sūcilomasutta  - 3. With Spiky </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.03. 3. Sūcilomasutta  - 3. With Spiky </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Indakavagga  - 1. With Indaka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā gayāyaṃ viharati ṭaṅkitamañce sūcilomassa yakkhassa bhavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Gayā on the cut-stone ledge in the haunt of Spiky the native spirit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena kharo ca yakkho sūcilomo ca yakkho bhagavato avidūre atikkamanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the native spirits Shaggy and Spiky were passing by not far from the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kharo yakkho sūcilomaṃ yakkhaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Shaggy said to Spiky, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“eso samaṇo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s an ascetic.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Neso samaṇo, samaṇako eso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s no ascetic, he’s a faker! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva jānāmi yadi vā so samaṇo yadi vā pana so samaṇako”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll soon find out whether he’s an ascetic or a faker.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sūcilomo yakkho yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato kāyaṃ upanāmesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Spiky went up to the Buddha and leaned up against his body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā kāyaṃ apanāmesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but the Buddha pulled away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sūcilomo yakkho bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Spiky said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhāyasi maṃ, samaṇā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are you afraid, ascetic?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvāhaṃ taṃ, āvuso, bhāyāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir, I’m not afraid. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ca te samphasso pāpako”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But your touch is nasty.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañhaṃ taṃ, samaṇa, pucchissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I will ask you a question, ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace me na byākarissasi, cittaṃ vā te khipissāmi, hadayaṃ vā te phālessāmi, pādesu vā gahetvā pāragaṅgāya khipissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t answer me, I’ll drive you insane, or explode your heart, or grab you by the feet and throw you to the far shore of the Ganges!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvāhaṃ taṃ, āvuso, passāmi sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya, yo me cittaṃ vā khipeyya hadayaṃ vā phāleyya pādesu vā gahetvā pāragaṅgāya khipeyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t see anyone in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans who could do that to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ca tvaṃ, āvuso, puccha yadā kaṅkhasī”ti. () </span></p>
<p class="p3">But anyway, ask what you wish.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rāgo ca doso ca kutonidānā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Where do greed and hate come from? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aratī ratī lomahaṃso kutojā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">From where do discontent, desire, and terror spring? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuto samuṭṭhāya manovitakkā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where do the mind’s thoughts originate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kumārakā dhaṅkamivossajantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a crow let loose by boys.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rāgo ca doso ca itonidānā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Greed and hate come from here; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aratī ratī lomahaṃso itojā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">from here spring discontent, desire, and terror; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ito samuṭṭhāya manovitakkā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">here’s where the mind’s thoughts originate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kumārakā dhaṅkamivossajanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a crow let loose by boys. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Snehajā attasambhūtā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Born of affection, originating in oneself, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nigrodhasseva khandhajā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the shoots from a banyan’s trunk; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puthū visattā kāmesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the many kinds of attachment to sensual pleasures </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māluvāva vitatā vane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are like camel’s foot creeper strung through the woods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye naṃ pajānanti yatonidānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who understand where they come from </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te naṃ vinodenti suṇohi yakkha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">get rid of them—listen up, spirit! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te duttaraṃ oghamimaṃ taranti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They cross this flood so hard to cross, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atiṇṇapubbaṃ apunabbhavāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not crossed before, so as to not be reborn.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
