<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>10.06-6. Piyaṅkarasutta  - 6. With Piyaṅkara </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">10.06. 6. Piyaṅkarasutta  - 6. With Piyaṅkara </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Indakavagga  - 1. With Indaka </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā anuruddho sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā anuruddho rattiyā paccūsasamayaṃ paccuṭṭhāya dhammapadāni bhāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Anuruddha rose at the crack of dawn and recited passages of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho piyaṅkaramātā yakkhinī puttakaṃ evaṃ tosesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the native spirit Piyaṅkara’s Mother soothed her little child, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā saddaṃ kari piyaṅkara, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t make a sound, Piyaṅkara! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu dhammapadāni bhāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant recites passages of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca dhammapadaṃ vijāniya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When we understand a passage, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭipajjema hitāya no siyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">we can practice for our welfare. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇesu ca saṃyamāmase, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let us keep from harming living creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sampajānamusā na bhaṇāmase; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and speak no lying words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhema susīlyamattano, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We should train ourselves well in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api muccema pisācayoniyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and hopefully we’ll be freed from the goblin realm.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
