<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.24-24. Accayasutta  - 24. Transgression </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.24. 24. Accayasutta  - 24. Transgression </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyavagga  - 3. The Third Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ … pe … ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena dve bhikkhū sampayojesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time two mendicants were overly attached, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatreko bhikkhu accasarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and one of them transgressed against the other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu tassa bhikkhuno santike accayaṃ accayato deseti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The transgressor confessed to the other mendicant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhikkhu nappaṭiggaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but they didn’t accept it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha, bhante, dve bhikkhū sampayojesuṃ, tatreko bhikkhu accasarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so, bhante, bhikkhu tassa bhikkhuno santike accayaṃ accayato deseti, so bhikkhu nappaṭiggaṇhātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dveme, bhikkhave, bālā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are two fools. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca accayaṃ accayato na passati, yo ca accayaṃ desentassa yathādhammaṃ nappaṭiggaṇhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One who doesn’t recognize when they’ve made a mistake. And one who doesn’t properly accept the confession of someone who’s made a mistake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, dve bālā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two fools. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dveme, bhikkhave, paṇḍitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are two who are astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca accayaṃ accayato passati, yo ca accayaṃ desentassa yathādhammaṃ paṭiggaṇhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One who recognizes when they’ve made a mistake. And one who properly accepts the confession of someone who’s made a mistake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, dve paṇḍitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the two who are astute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo sudhammāyaṃ sabhāyaṃ deve tāvatiṃse anunayamāno tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once upon a time, mendicants, Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of the Thirty-Three, recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kodho vo vasamāyātu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Control your anger; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā ca mittehi vo jarā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t let friendships decay. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agarahiyaṃ mā garahittha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t blame the blameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā ca bhāsittha pesuṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and don’t say divisive things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha pāpajanaṃ kodho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For anger crushes bad people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pabbatovābhimaddatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a mountain.’”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
