<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.07-7. Nadubbhiyasutta  - 7. Not Betray </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.07. 7. Nadubbhiyasutta  - 7. Not Betray </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, sakkassa devānamindassa rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, as Sakka, lord of gods, was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yopi me assa supaccatthiko tassapāhaṃ na dubbheyyan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I should never betray even a sworn enemy.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo sakkassa devānamindassa cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya yena sakko devānamindo tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Vepacitti, lord of demons, knowing what Sakka was thinking, approached him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo vepacittiṃ asurindaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka saw Vepacitti coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna vepacittiṃ asurindaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tiṭṭha, vepacitti, gahitosī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Stop, Vepacitti, you’re caught!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yadeva te, mārisa, pubbe cittaṃ, tadeva tvaṃ mā pajahāsī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Dear sir, don’t give up the idea you just had!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sapassu ca me, vepacitti, adubbhāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Swear, Vepacitti, that you won’t betray me.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yaṃ musā bhaṇato pāpaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Whatever bad things happen to a liar, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ pāpaṃ ariyūpavādino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or to someone who slanders the noble ones, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mittadduno ca yaṃ pāpaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">or to someone who betrays a friend, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ pāpaṃ akataññuno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or to someone who’s ungrateful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tameva pāpaṃ phusatu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the same bad things impact </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo te dubbhe sujampatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who betrays you, Sujā’s husband.’”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
