<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.02-2. Susīmasutta  - 2. With Susīma </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.02. 2. Susīmasutta  - 2. With Susīma </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, asurā deve abhiyaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, the demons marched against the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo susīmaṃ devaputtaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the god Susīma, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ete, tāta susīma, asurā deve abhiyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Dear Susīma, the demons march against the gods! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaccha, tāta susīma, asure paccuyyāhī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Go, and march against the demons!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃ, bhaddantavā’ti kho, bhikkhave, susīmo devaputto sakkassa devānamindassa paṭissutvā pamādaṃ āpādesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Yes, lord,’ replied Susīma. But he fell into negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo susīmaṃ devaputtaṃ āmantesi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dutiyampi pamādaṃ āpādesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo susīmaṃ devaputtaṃ āmantesi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a third time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi pamādaṃ āpādesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo susīmaṃ devaputtaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka addressed the god Susīma in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Anuṭṭhahaṃ avāyāmaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Susīma, go to that place </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhaṃ yatrādhigacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where you can achieve happiness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susīma tattha gacchāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">without working for it or trying hard—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mañca tattheva pāpayā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and take me with you!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Alasvassa anuṭṭhātā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That a lazy man who does no work, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca kiccāni kāraye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and doesn’t do his duty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbakāmasamiddhassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">should fulfill all his desires: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ me sakka varaṃ disā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka, grant me this boon!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yatthālaso anuṭṭhātā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Susīma, go to that place </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">accantaṃ sukhamedhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where a lazy man who does no work </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susīma tattha gacchāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">prospers in unending happiness—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mañca tattheva pāpayā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and take me with you!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Akammunā devaseṭṭha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘O Sakka, best of gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakka vindemu yaṃ sukhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that we might find the happiness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asokaṃ anupāyāsaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s sorrowless, unstressed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ me sakka varaṃ disā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sakka, grant me this boon!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sace atthi akammena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If there exists anywhere a place </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">koci kvaci na jīvati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where you can live happily without working, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbānassa hi so maggo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that surely would be extinguishment’s path! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">susīma tattha gacchāhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Susīma, go to that place </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañca tattheva pāpayā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and take me with you!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So hi nāma, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo sakaṃ puññaphalaṃ upajīvamāno devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ issariyādhipaccaṃ rajjaṃ kārento uṭṭhānavīriyassa vaṇṇavādī bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, mendicants, even Sakka, lord of gods—while living off of the fruit of his good and bad deeds, and ruling as sovereign lord over these gods of the Thirty-Three—will speak in praise of initiative and energy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha kho taṃ, bhikkhave, sobhetha, yaṃ tumhe evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitā samānā uṭṭhaheyyātha ghaṭeyyātha vāyameyyātha appattassa pattiyā, anadhigatassa adhigamāya, asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since you have gone forth in such a well explained teaching and training, it would be truly beautiful for you to try hard, strive, and make an effort to attain the unattained, achieve the unachieved, and realize the unrealized!”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
