<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>11.18-18. Gahaṭṭhavandanāsutta  - 18. Who Sakka Worships </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">11.18. 18. Gahaṭṭhavandanāsutta  - 18. Who Sakka Worships </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra … pe … etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo mātaliṃ saṅgāhakaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed his charioteer Mātali, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yojehi, samma mātali, sahassayuttaṃ ājaññarathaṃ. Uyyānabhūmiṃ gacchāma subhūmiṃ dassanāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My dear Mātali, harness the chariot with its team of a thousand thoroughbreds. We will go to a park and see the scenery.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Evaṃ, bhaddantavā’ti kho, bhikkhave, mātali saṅgāhako sakkassa devānamindassa paṭissutvā sahassayuttaṃ ājaññarathaṃ yojetvā sakkassa devānamindassa paṭivedesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Yes, lord,’ replied Mātali. He harnessed the chariot and informed Sakka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yutto kho te, mārisa, sahassayutto ājaññaratho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Good sir, the chariot with its team of a thousand thoroughbreds has been harnessed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassadāni kālaṃ maññasī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go at your convenience.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo vejayantapāsādā orohanto añjaliṃ katvā sudaṃ puthuddisā namassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sakka descended from the Palace of Victory, raised his joined palms, and revered the different quarters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, mātali saṅgāhako sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So Mātali the charioteer addressed Sakka in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ namassanti tevijjā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Those proficient in the three Vedas worship you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbe bhummā ca khattiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as do all the aristocrats on earth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāro ca mahārājā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Four Great Kings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tidasā ca yasassino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the glorious Thirty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ko nāma so yakkho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So what’s the name of the spirit </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ tvaṃ sakka namassasī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that you worship, Sakka?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Maṃ namassanti tevijjā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Those proficient in the three Vedas worship me, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbe bhummā ca khattiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as do all the aristocrats on earth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāro ca mahārājā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Four Great Kings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tidasā ca yasassino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the glorious Thirty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañca sīlasampanne, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I revere those accomplished in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cirarattasamāhite; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who have long trained in immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāpabbajite vande, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who have rightly gone forth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacariyaparāyane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to complete the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye gahaṭṭhā puññakarā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I also worship those householders, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīlavanto upāsakā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the ethical lay followers </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammena dāraṃ posenti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who make merit, Mātali, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te namassāmi mātalī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">supporting a partner in a principled manner.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Seṭṭhā hi kira lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Those who you worship </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye tvaṃ sakka namassasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seem to be the best in the world, Sakka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampi te namassāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I too will worship </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye namassasi vāsavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who you worship, Sakka.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna maghavā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After saying this, Maghavā the chief, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devarājā sujampati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">king of gods, Sujā’s husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puthuddisā namassitvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having worshipped the quarters </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pamukho rathamāruhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">climbed into his chariot.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
