<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.01-1. Paṭhamakassapasutta  - 1. With Kassapa (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.01. 1. Paṭhamakassapasutta  - 1. With Kassapa (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kassapo devaputto abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho kassapo devaputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the glorious god Kassapa, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhuṃ bhagavā pakāsesi, no ca bhikkhuno anusāsan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha has revealed the mendicant, but not his instructions to a mendicant.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, kassapa, taññevettha paṭibhātū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Kassapa, clarify this matter yourself.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Subhāsitassa sikkhetha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They should train in following good advice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇūpāsanassa ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in attending closely to ascetics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekāsanassa ca raho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">in sitting alone in hidden places, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittavūpasamassa cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and in calming the mind.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca kassapo devaputto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what the god Kassapa said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samanuñño satthā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teacher approved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kassapo devaputto “samanuñño me satthā”ti bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Kassapa, knowing that the teacher approved, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
