<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.05-5. Dāmalisutta  - 5. With Dāmali </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.05. 5. Dāmalisutta  - 5. With Dāmali </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho dāmali devaputto abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the glorious god Dāmali, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho dāmali devaputto bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Karaṇīyametaṃ brāhmaṇena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is what should be done by a brahmin: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Padhānaṃ akilāsunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">unrelenting striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmānaṃ vippahānena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, with the giving up of sensual pleasures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tenāsīsate bhavan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they won’t hope to be reborn.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthi kiccaṃ brāhmaṇassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The brahmin has nothing left to do,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(dāmalīti bhagavā) </span></p>
<p class="p3">said the Buddha to Dāmali, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katakicco hi brāhmaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“for they’ve completed their task. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva na gādhaṃ labhati nadīsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So long as a person fails to gain a footing in the river, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyūhati sabbagattebhi jantu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they strive with every limb. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gādhañca laddhāna thale ṭhito yo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But someone who has gained a footing and stands on dry land </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāyūhatī pāragato hi sova. </span></p>
<p class="p3">need not strive, for they have reached the far shore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esūpamā dāmali brāhmaṇassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dāmali, this is a simile for the brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavassa nipakassa jhāyino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">alert, a meditator who has ended defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pappuyya jātimaraṇassa antaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since they’ve reached the end of rebirth and death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāyūhatī pāragato hi so”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they need not strive, for they have reached the far shore.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
