<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.25-25. Jantusutta  - 25. With Jantu </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.25. 25. Jantusutta  - 25. With Jantu </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Nānātitthiyavagga  - 3. Various Sectarians </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ sambahulā bhikkhū, kosalesu viharanti himavantapasse araññakuṭikāya uddhatā unnaḷā capalā mukharā vikiṇṇavācā muṭṭhassatino asampajānā asamāhitā vibbhantacittā pākatindriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time several mendicants were staying in the Kosalan lands, in a wilderness hut on the slopes of the Himalayas. They were restless, insolent, fickle, gossipy, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho jantu devaputto tadahuposathe pannarase yena te bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te bhikkhū gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then on the fifteenth day sabbath the god Jantu went up to those mendicants and addressed them in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sukhajīvino pure āsuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The mendicants used to live happily, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhū gotamasāvakā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as disciples of Gotama. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anicchā piṇḍamesanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Desireless they sought alms; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anicchā sayanāsanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">desireless they used their lodgings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Loke aniccataṃ ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that the world was impermanent </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhassantaṃ akaṃsu te. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they made an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dupposaṃ katvā attānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But now they’ve made themselves hard to look after, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāme gāmaṇikā viya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like chiefs in a village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhutvā bhutvā nipajjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat and eat and then lie down, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parāgāresu mucchitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">unconscious in the homes of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃghassa añjaliṃ katvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having raised my joined palms to the Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idhekacce vadāmahaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I speak here only about certain people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaviddhā anāthā te, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re rejects, with no protector, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā petā tatheva te. </span></p>
<p class="p3">just like those who have passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kho pamattā viharanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m speaking about </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te me sandhāya bhāsitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who live negligently. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye appamattā viharanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">To those who live diligently </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">namo tesaṃ karomahan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I pay homage.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
