<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.09-9. Candimasutta  - 9. The Moon </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.09. 9. Candimasutta  - 9. The Moon </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena candimā devaputto rāhunā asurindena gahito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Moon God had been seized by Rāhu, lord of demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho candimā devaputto bhagavantaṃ anussaramāno tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Moon God, recollecting the Buddha, at that time recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Namo te buddha vīratthu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Homage to you, Buddha, hero! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vippamuttosi sabbadhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re freed in every way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sambādhapaṭipannosmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve wandered into confinement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa me saraṇaṃ bhavā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">be my refuge!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā candimaṃ devaputtaṃ ārabbha rāhuṃ asurindaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha addressed Rāhu in verse concerning the Moon God: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathāgataṃ arahantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Moon God has gone for refuge </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">candimā saraṇaṃ gato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to the Realized One, the perfected one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāhu candaṃ pamuñcassu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rāhu, release the Moon! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhā lokānukampakā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Buddhas have compassion for the world!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rāhu asurindo candimaṃ devaputtaṃ muñcitvā taramānarūpo yena vepacitti asurindo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā saṃviggo lomahaṭṭhajāto ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Rāhu, having released the Moon, rushed to see Vepacitti, lord of demons and stood to one side, shocked and awestruck. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitaṃ kho rāhuṃ asurindaṃ vepacitti asurindo gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Vepacitti addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu santaramānova, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why the rush? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāhu candaṃ pamuñcasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rāhu, you released the Moon </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃviggarūpo āgamma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and came here looking like you’re in shock: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kiṃ nu bhītova tiṭṭhasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">why do you stand there so scared?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattadhā me phale muddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“My head would have exploded in seven pieces, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jīvanto na sukhaṃ labhe; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I would have found no happiness in life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddhagāthābhigītomhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when enchanted by the Buddha’s spell, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce muñceyya candiman”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I had not released the Moon.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
