<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.11-11. Candimasasutta  - 11. With Candimasa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.11. 11. Candimasasutta  - 11. With Candimasa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Anāthapiṇḍikavagga  - 2. With Anāthapiṇḍika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho candimaso devaputto abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the glorious god Candimasa, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho candimaso devaputto bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te hi sotthiṃ gamissanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Like deer in a mosquito-free marsh, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kacchevāmakase magā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they will reach a safe place </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jhānāni upasampajja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having entered the absorptions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekodi nipakā satā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">unified, alert, and mindful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te hi pāraṃ gamissanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Like fish when the net is cut, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chetvā jālaṃva ambujo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they will reach the far shore </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jhānāni upasampajja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having entered the absorptions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamattā raṇañjahā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">diligent, with vices discarded.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
