<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.14-14. Nandanasutta  - 14. With Nandana </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">2.14. 14. Nandanasutta  - 14. With Nandana </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Anāthapiṇḍikavagga  - 2. With Anāthapiṇḍika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho nandano devaputto bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Standing to one side, the god Nandana addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pucchāmi taṃ gotama bhūripañña, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I ask you, Gotama, whose wisdom is vast, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāvaṭaṃ bhagavato ñāṇadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Blessed One of unhindered knowledge and vision. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃvidhaṃ sīlavantaṃ vadanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What kind of person do they call ethical? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃvidhaṃ paññavantaṃ vadanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What kind of person do they call wise? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃvidho dukkhamaticca iriyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What kind of person lives on after transcending suffering? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃvidhaṃ devatā pūjayantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What kind of person is worshipped by the deities?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo sīlavā paññavā bhāvitatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A person who is ethical, wise, self-developed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samāhito jhānarato satīmā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">becomes immersed in samādhi, loving absorption, mindful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbassa sokā vigatā pahīnā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s gotten rid of and given up all sorrows, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavo antimadehadhārī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with defilements ended, they bear their final body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāvidhaṃ sīlavantaṃ vadanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the kind of person they call ethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāvidhaṃ paññavantaṃ vadanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the kind of person they call wise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāvidho dukkhamaticca iriyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That kind of person lives on after transcending suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāvidhaṃ devatā pūjayantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That kind of person is worshipped by the deities.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
