<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.10-10. Bandhanasutta  - 10. Shackles </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.10. 10. Bandhanasutta  - 10. Shackles </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Shackles </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena raññā pasenadinā kosalena mahājanakāyo bandhāpito hoti, appekacce rajjūhi appekacce andūhi appekacce saṅkhalikāhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a large group of people had been put in shackles by King Pasenadi of Kosala—some in ropes, some in manacles, some in chains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pavisiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after the meal, when they returned from alms-round, they went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what was happening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha, bhante, raññā pasenadinā kosalena mahājanakāyo bandhāpito, appekacce rajjūhi appekacce andūhi appekacce saṅkhalikāhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etamatthaṃ viditvā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing the meaning of this, on that occasion the Buddha recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na taṃ daḷhaṃ bandhanamāhu dhīrā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The wise say that shackle is not strong </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadāyasaṃ dārujaṃ pabbajañca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s made of iron, wood, or knots. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sārattarattā maṇikuṇḍalesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But obsession with jewels and earrings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puttesu dāresu ca yā apekkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">concern for your partners and children: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ daḷhaṃ bandhanamāhu dhīrā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">this the wise say is a strong shackle </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ohārinaṃ sithilaṃ duppamuñcaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that drags you down, tight, hard to escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etampi chetvāna paribbajanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They cut this too and go forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anapekkhino kāmasukhaṃ pahāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">unconcerned, having given up sensual pleasures.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamo vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daharo puriso jarā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">piyaṃ attānarakkhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appakā aḍḍakaraṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mallikā yaññabandhananti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
