<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.20-20. Dutiyaaputtakasutta  - 20. Childless (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.20. 20. Dutiyaaputtakasutta  - 20. Childless (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Childless </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo divā divassa yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to the Buddha in the middle of the day … The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handa kuto nu tvaṃ, mahārāja, āgacchasi divā divassā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, great king, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhante, sāvatthiyaṃ seṭṭhi gahapati kālaṅkato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, here in Sāvatthī a financier householder has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamahaṃ aputtakaṃ sāpateyyaṃ rājantepuraṃ atiharitvā āgacchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he died childless, I have come after transferring his fortune to the royal compound. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sataṃ, bhante, satasahassāni hiraññasseva, ko pana vādo rūpiyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There was ten million in gold, not to mention the silver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kho pana, bhante, seṭṭhissa gahapatissa evarūpo bhattabhogo ahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And yet that financier ate meals of </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṇājakaṃ bhuñjati bilaṅgadutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">rough gruel with pickles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpo vatthabhogo ahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He wore clothes consisting of </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāṇaṃ dhāreti tipakkhavasanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">three pieces of sunn hemp. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpo yānabhogo ahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He traveled around in a vehicle that was </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jajjararathakena yāti paṇṇachattakena dhāriyamānenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a dilapidated little cart, holding a leaf as sunshade.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, mahārāja, evametaṃ, mahārāja. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, great king! That’s so true! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtapubbaṃ so, mahārāja, seṭṭhi gahapati taggarasikhiṃ nāma paccekasambuddhaṃ piṇḍapātena paṭipādesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once upon a time, great king, that financier householder provided alms-food on behalf of a Buddha awakened for himself named Tagarasikhī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Detha samaṇassa piṇḍan’ti vatvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He instructed: ‘Give alms to that ascetic,’ before getting up from his seat and leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Datvā ca pana pacchā vippaṭisārī ahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But after giving he regretted it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘varametaṃ piṇḍapātaṃ dāsā vā kammakarā vā bhuñjeyyun’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘It would have been better to feed the bondservants or workers with that alms-food.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhātu ca pana ekaputtakaṃ sāpateyyassa kāraṇā jīvitā voropesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s more, he murdered his brother’s only child for the sake of his fortune. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho so, mahārāja, seṭṭhi gahapati taggarasikhiṃ paccekasambuddhaṃ piṇḍapātena paṭipādesi, tassa kammassa vipākena sattakkhattuṃ sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajji. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because that financier provided Tagarasikhī with alms-food, as a result of that deed he was reborn seven times in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva kammassa vipākāvasesena imissāyeva sāvatthiyā sattakkhattuṃ seṭṭhittaṃ kāresi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as a residual result of that same deed he held the position of financier seven times right here in Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho so, mahārāja, seṭṭhi gahapati datvā pacchā vippaṭisārī ahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because that financier regretted giving alms, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘varametaṃ piṇḍapātaṃ dāsā vā kammakarā vā bhuñjeyyun’ti, tassa kammassa vipākena nāssuḷārāya bhattabhogāya cittaṃ namati, nāssuḷārāya vatthabhogāya cittaṃ namati, nāssuḷārāya yānabhogāya cittaṃ namati, nāssuḷārānaṃ pañcannaṃ kāmaguṇānaṃ bhogāya cittaṃ namati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a result of that deed his mind didn’t tend to enjoy nice food, clothes, vehicles, or the five refined kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho so, mahārāja, seṭṭhi gahapati bhātu ca pana ekaputtakaṃ sāpateyyassa kāraṇā jīvitā voropesi, tassa kammassa vipākena bahūni vassāni bahūni vassasatāni bahūni vassasahassāni bahūni vassasatasahassāni niraye paccittha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because that financier murdered his brother’s only child for the sake of his fortune, as a result of that deed he burned in hell for many years, for many hundreds, many thousands, many hundreds of thousands of years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva kammassa vipākāvasesena idaṃ sattamaṃ aputtakaṃ sāpateyyaṃ rājakosaṃ paveseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as a residual result of that same deed for the seventh time, since he is childless, his fortune ends up in the royal treasury. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kho, mahārāja, seṭṭhissa gahapatissa purāṇañca puññaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ, navañca puññaṃ anupacitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now the old merit of that financier has been used up, and he hasn’t accumulated new merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajja pana, mahārāja, seṭṭhi gahapati mahāroruve niraye paccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Today, great king, that financier burns in the Great Hell of Screams.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante, seṭṭhi gahapati mahāroruvaṃ nirayaṃ upapanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, sir, that financier has been reborn in the Great Hell of Screams?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, mahārāja, seṭṭhi gahapati mahāroruvaṃ nirayaṃ upapanno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes he has, great king.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhaññaṃ dhanaṃ rajataṃ jātarūpaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Grain, wealth, silver, and gold, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariggahaṃ vāpi yadatthi kiñci; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or whatever other possessions there are; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dāsā kammakarā pessā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">bondservants, workers, employees, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye cassa anujīvino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and those dependent for their livelihood: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaṃ nādāya gantabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you must go on without taking these; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaṃ nikkhippagāminaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">all of them are left behind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañca karoti kāyena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the deeds you do </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vācāya uda cetasā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by body, speech, and mind—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi tassa sakaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s what you can call your own. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃva ādāya gacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what you take when you go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃvassa anugaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what goes with you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chāyāva anapāyinī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a shadow that never leaves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā kareyya kalyāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should do good, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nicayaṃ samparāyikaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">investing in the future life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññāni paralokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The good deeds of sentient beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">patiṭṭhā honti pāṇinan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">support them in the next world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyo vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jaṭilā pañca rājāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Doṇapākakurena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgāmena dve vuttāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mallikā dve appamādena ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aputtakena dve vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaggo tena pavuccatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
