<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.22-22. Ayyikāsutta  - 22. Grandmother </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.22. 22. Ayyikāsutta  - 22. Grandmother </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyavagga  - 3. Kosala </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">King Pasenadi of Kosala sat to one side, and the Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handa kuto nu tvaṃ, mahārāja, āgacchasi divādivassā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, great king, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayyikā me, bhante, kālaṅkatā jiṇṇā vuḍḍhā mahallikā addhagatā vayoanuppattā vīsavassasatikā jātiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, my grandmother has passed away. She was old, elderly and senior. She was advanced in years and had reached the final stage of life; she was a hundred and twenty years old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyikā kho pana me, bhante, piyā hoti manāpā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I loved my grandmother; she was dear to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthiratanena cepāhaṃ, bhante, labheyyaṃ ‘mā me ayyikā kālamakāsī’ti, hatthiratanampāhaṃ dadeyyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If by giving away the elephant treasure I could get my grandmother back, I’d do it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me ayyikā kālamakāsī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaratanena cepāhaṃ, bhante, labheyyaṃ ‘mā me ayyikā kālamakāsī’ti, assaratanampāhaṃ dadeyyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If by giving away the horse treasure I could get my grandmother back, I’d do it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me ayyikā kālamakāsī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāmavarena cepāhaṃ, bhante, labheyyaṃ ‘mā me ayyikā kālamakāsī’ti, gāmavarampāhaṃ dadeyyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If by giving away a prize village I could get my grandmother back, I’d do it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me ayyikā kālamakāsī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Janapadapadesena cepāhaṃ, bhante, labheyyaṃ ‘mā me ayyikā kālamakāsī’ti, janapadapadesampāhaṃ dadeyyaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If by giving away the whole country I could get my grandmother back, I’d do it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me ayyikā kālamakāsī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sabbe sattā, mahārāja, maraṇadhammā maraṇapariyosānā maraṇaṃ anatītā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, all sentient beings are liable to die. Death is their end; they’re not exempt from death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvasubhāsitamidaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">how well said this was by the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbe sattā maraṇadhammā maraṇapariyosānā maraṇaṃ anatītā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘All sentient beings are liable to die. Death is their end; they’re not exempt from death.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, mahārāja, evametaṃ, mahārāja. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, great king! That’s so true! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe sattā maraṇadhammā maraṇapariyosānā maraṇaṃ anatītā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">All sentient beings are liable to die. Death is their end; they’re not exempt from death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, mahārāja, yāni kānici kumbhakārabhājanāni āmakāni ceva pakkāni ca sabbāni tāni bhedanadhammāni bhedanapariyosānāni bhedanaṃ anatītāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like the vessels made by potters. Whatever kind they are, whether baked or unbaked, all of them are liable to break apart. Breaking is their end; they’re not exempt from breakage. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, mahārāja, sabbe sattā maraṇadhammā maraṇapariyosānā maraṇaṃ anatītā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, all sentient beings are liable to die. Death is their end; they’re not exempt from death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sabbe sattā marissanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“All beings will die, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maraṇantañhi jīvitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for life ends with death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathākammaṃ gamissanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They pass on according to their deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puññapāpaphalūpagā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">reaping the fruits of good and bad. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirayaṃ pāpakammantā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who do bad go to hell, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puññakammā ca suggatiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and if you do good you go to heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā kareyya kalyāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should do good, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nicayaṃ samparāyikaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">investing in the future life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññāni paralokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The good deeds of sentient beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">patiṭṭhā honti pāṇinan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">support them in the next world.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
