<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.13-13. Doṇapākasutta  - 13. A Bucket of Rice </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.13. 13. Doṇapākasutta  - 13. A Bucket of Rice </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Childless </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rājā pasenadi kosalo doṇapākakuraṃ bhuñjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala used to eat rice by the bucket. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo bhuttāvī mahassāsī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then after eating King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to the Buddha, huffing and puffing. He bowed and sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā rājānaṃ pasenadiṃ kosalaṃ bhuttāviṃ mahassāsiṃ viditvā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing that King Pasenadi was huffing and puffing after eating, on that occasion the Buddha recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Manujassa sadā satīmato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a man is always mindful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mattaṃ jānato laddhabhojane; </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowing moderation in eating, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tanukassa bhavanti vedanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">his discomfort diminishes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṇikaṃ jīrati āyupālayan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he ages slowly, taking care of his life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sudassano māṇavo rañño pasenadissa kosalassa piṭṭhito ṭhito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmin student Sudassana was standing behind the king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo sudassanaṃ māṇavaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then King Pasenadi addressed him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi tvaṃ, tāta sudassana, bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ pariyāpuṇitvā mama bhattābhihāre bhattābhihāre bhāsa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, dear Sudassana, memorize this verse in the Buddha’s presence and recite it to me whenever I am presented with a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañca te devasikaṃ kahāpaṇasataṃ kahāpaṇasataṃ niccaṃ bhikkhaṃ pavattayissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll set up a regular daily allowance of a hundred dollars for you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, devā”ti kho sudassano māṇavo rañño pasenadissa kosalassa paṭissutvā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ pariyāpuṇitvā rañño pasenadissa kosalassa bhattābhihāre sudaṃ bhāsati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Your Majesty,” replied Sudassana. He memorized that verse in the Buddha’s presence, and then whenever the king was presented with a meal he would repeat it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Manujassa sadā satīmato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a man is always mindful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mattaṃ jānato laddhabhojane; </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowing moderation in eating, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tanukassa bhavanti vedanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">his discomfort diminishes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṇikaṃ jīrati āyupālayan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he ages slowly, taking care of his life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo anupubbena nāḷikodanaparamatāya saṇṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the king gradually got used to having no more than a pint of rice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo aparena samayena susallikhitagatto pāṇinā gattāni anumajjanto tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">After some time King Pasenadi’s body slimmed right down. Stroking his limbs with his hands, at that time he was inspired to exclaim: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ubhayena vata maṃ so bhagavā atthena anukampi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha truly has compassion for me in both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhadhammikena ceva atthena samparāyikena cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the good of the present life and the good of the next life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
