<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.09-9. Yaññasutta  - 9. Sacrifice </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.09. 9. Yaññasutta  - 9. Sacrifice </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Shackles </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rañño pasenadissa kosalassa mahāyañño paccupaṭṭhito hoti, pañca ca usabhasatāni pañca ca vacchatarasatāni pañca ca vacchatarisatāni pañca ca ajasatāni pañca ca urabbhasatāni thūṇūpanītāni honti yaññatthāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a big sacrifice had been set up for King Pasenadi of Kosala. Five hundred chief bulls, five hundred bullocks, five hundred heifers, five hundred goats, and five hundred rams had been led to the pillar for the sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepissa te honti dāsāti vā pessāti vā kammakarāti vā, tepi daṇḍatajjitā bhayatajjitā assumukhā rudamānā parikammāni karonti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His bondservants, employees, and workers did their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping with tearful faces. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pavisiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after the meal, when they returned from alms-round, they went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what was happening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha, bhante, rañño pasenadissa kosalassa mahāyañño paccupaṭṭhito hoti, pañca ca usabhasatāni pañca ca vacchatarasatāni pañca ca vacchatarisatāni pañca ca ajasatāni pañca ca urabbhasatāni thūṇūpanītāni honti yaññatthāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepissa te honti dāsāti vā pessāti vā kammakarāti vā, tepi daṇḍatajjitā bhayatajjitā assumukhā rudamānā parikammāni karontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etamatthaṃ viditvā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing the meaning of this, on that occasion the Buddha recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Assamedhaṃ purisamedhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Horse sacrifice, human sacrifice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāpāsaṃ vājapeyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the sacrifices of the ‘stick-casting’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niraggaḷaṃ mahārambhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the ‘royal soma drinking’, and the ‘unbarred’—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na te honti mahapphalā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">these huge violent sacrifices yield no great fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajeḷakā ca gāvo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The great sages of good conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vividhā yattha haññare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t attend sacrifices </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na taṃ sammaggatā yaññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">where goats, sheep, and cattle </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upayanti mahesino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and various creatures are killed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca yaññā nirārambhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the great sages of good conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yajanti anukulaṃ sadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">do attend non-violent sacrifices </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajeḷakā ca gāvo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">of regular family tradition, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vividhā nettha haññare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where goats, sheep, and cattle, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ sammaggatā yaññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and various creatures aren’t killed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upayanti mahesino. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ yajetha medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A clever person should sacrifice like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eso yañño mahapphalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for this sacrifice is very fruitful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañhi yajamānassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a sponsor of sacrifices like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyo hoti na pāpiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">things get better, not worse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañño ca vipulo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a sacrifice is truly abundant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasīdanti ca devatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and even the deities are pleased.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
