<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.03-3. Subhasutta  - 3. Beautiful </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.03. 3. Subhasutta  - 3. Beautiful </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Life Span </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā uruvelāyaṃ viharati najjā nerañjarāya tīre ajapālanigrodhamūle paṭhamābhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time, when he was first awakened, the Buddha was staying near Uruvelā at the root of the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā rattandhakāratimisāyaṃ abbhokāse nisinno hoti, devo ca ekamekaṃ phusāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was meditating in the open during the dark of night, while a gentle rain drizzled down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā, bhagavato bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo, yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato avidūre uccāvacā vaṇṇanibhā upadaṃseti, subhā ceva asubhā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the Buddha feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, approached him, and while not far away generated a rainbow of bright colors, both beautiful and ugly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saṃsaraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Transmigrating for such a long time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṇṇaṃ katvā subhāsubhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve made forms beautiful and ugly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alaṃ te tena pāpima, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Enough of this, Wicked One! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nihato tvamasi antaka. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re beaten, terminator. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kāyena vācāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who are well restrained </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā ca susaṃvutā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in body, speech, and mind </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na te māravasānugā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t fall under Māra’s sway, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na te mārassa baddhagū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t become your footmen.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro … pe … tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra … vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
