<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.05-5. Dutiyamārapāsasutta  - 5. Māra’s Snares (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.05. 5. Dutiyamārapāsasutta  - 5. Māra’s Snares (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Life Span </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bārāṇasiyaṃ viharati isipatane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Muttāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sabbapāsehi ye dibbā ye ca mānusā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I am freed from all snares, both human and divine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhepi, bhikkhave, muttā sabbapāsehi ye dibbā ye ca mānusā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You are also freed from all snares, both human and divine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caratha, bhikkhave, cārikaṃ bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wander forth, mendicants, for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of compassion for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā ekena dve agamittha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let not two go by one road. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Desetha, bhikkhave, dhammaṃ ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāsetha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Teach the Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And reveal a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi sattā apparajakkhajātikā, assavanatā dhammassa parihāyanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are beings with little dust in their eyes. They’re in decline because they haven’t heard the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavissanti dhammassa aññātāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There will be those who understand the teaching! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampi, bhikkhave, yena uruvelā senānigamo tenupasaṅkamissāmi dhammadesanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will travel to Uruvelā, the village of Senāni, in order to teach the Dhamma.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Baddhosi sabbapāsehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re bound by all snares, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye dibbā ye ca mānusā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">both human and divine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahābandhanabaddhosi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re bound by the great bond: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me samaṇa mokkhasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you won’t escape me, ascetic!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Muttāhaṃ sabbapāsehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m freed from all snares, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye dibbā ye ca mānusā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">both human and divine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahābandhanamuttomhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m freed from the great bonds; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nihato tvamasi antakā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re beaten, terminator!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā … pe … tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra … vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
