<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.11-11. Pāsāṇasutta  - 11. Boulders </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.11. 11. Pāsāṇasutta  - 11. Boulders </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Rule </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā rattandhakāratimisāyaṃ abbhokāse nisinno hoti, devo ca ekamekaṃ phusāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was meditating in the open during the dark of night, while a gentle rain drizzled down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā bhagavato bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato avidūre mahante pāsāṇe padālesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the Buddha feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, approached him, and crushed some large boulders close by him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sacepi kevalaṃ sabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Even if you shake </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gijjhakūṭaṃ calessasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">this entire Vulture’s Peak, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva sammāvimuttānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the rightly released, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhānaṃ atthi iñjitan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the awakened, are unshaken.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
