<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.13-13. Sakalikasutta  - 13. A Splinter </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.13. 13. Sakalikasutta  - 13. A Splinter </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Rule </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati maddakucchismiṃ migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in the Maddakucchi deer park. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavato pādo sakalikāya khato hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha’s foot had been cut by a splinter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhusā sudaṃ bhagavato vedanā vattanti sārīrikā dukkhā tibbā kharā kaṭukā asātā amanāpā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha was stricken by harrowing pains; physical feelings that were painful, sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, and disagreeable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā sudaṃ bhagavā sato sampajāno adhivāseti avihaññamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But he endured with mindfulness and situational awareness, without worrying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā catugguṇaṃ saṅghāṭiṃ paññapetvā dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyyaṃ kappesi pāde pādaṃ accādhāya sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then he spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mandiyā nu kho sesi udāhu kāveyyamatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are you feeble that you lie down? Or are you drunk on poetry? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthā nu te sampacurā na santi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t you have all that you need? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko vivitte sayanāsanamhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Alone in a secluded lodging, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niddāmukho kimidaṃ soppase vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">why this sleeping, sleepyhead?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na mandiyā sayāmi nāpi kāveyyamatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m not feeble that I lie down, nor am I drunk on poetry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthaṃ sameccāhamapetasoko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having reached the goal, I’m rid of sorrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eko vivitte sayanāsanamhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Alone in a secluded lodging, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sayāmahaṃ sabbabhūtānukampī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I lie down full of compassion for all living creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesampi sallaṃ urasi paviṭṭhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even those with a dart stuck in the breast, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muhuṃ muhuṃ hadayaṃ vedhamānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">piercing the heart again and again, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tepīdha soppaṃ labhare sasallā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">are able to get some sleep. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā ahaṃ na supe vītasallo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So why not I, whose dart is drawn out? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jaggaṃ na saṅke napi bhemi sottuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t lie awake tense, nor do I fear to sleep. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattindivā nānutapanti māmaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The days and nights don’t disturb me, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hāniṃ na passāmi kuhiñci loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">as I see no decline for myself in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā supe sabbabhūtānukampī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I lie down full of compassion for all living creatures.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
