<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.07-7. Supatisutta  - 7. Sleeping </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.07. 7. Supatisutta  - 7. Sleeping </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Life Span </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bahudevarattiṃ abbhokāse caṅkamitvā rattiyā paccūsasamayaṃ pāde pakkhāletvā vihāraṃ pavisitvā </span></p>
<p class="p3">He spent most of the night practicing walking meditation in the open. At the crack of dawn he washed his feet and entered his dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyyaṃ kappesi pāde pādaṃ accādhāya sato sampajāno uṭṭhānasaññaṃ manasi karitvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He laid down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ soppasi kiṃ nu soppasi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What, you’re asleep? Really, you’re asleep? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kimidaṃ soppasi dubbhago viya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You sleep like a loser—what’s up with that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suññamagāranti soppasi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You sleep, thinking that the hut is empty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kimidaṃ soppasi sūriye uggate”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You sleep when the sun has come up—what’s up with that?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassa jālinī visattikā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“For them there is no craving—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhā natthi kuhiñci netave; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the weaver, the clinger—to lead them anywhere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbūpadhiparikkhayā buddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of all attachments the awakened Buddha sleeps. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Soppati kiṃ tavettha mārā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s that got to do with you, Māra?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā … pe … tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra … vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
