<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.01-1. Tapokammasutta  - 1. Mortification </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.01. 1. Tapokammasutta  - 1. Mortification </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Life Span </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā uruvelāyaṃ viharati najjā nerañjarāya tīre ajapālanigrodhamūle paṭhamābhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time, when he was first awakened, the Buddha was staying near Uruvelā at the root of the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mutto vatamhi tāya dukkarakārikāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am truly freed from that grueling work! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu mutto vatamhi tāya anatthasaṃhitāya dukkarakārikāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thank goodness I’m freed from that pointless grueling work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu vatamhi mutto bodhiṃ samajjhagan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thank goodness that, steadfast and mindful, I have attained awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā bhagavato cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Māra the Wicked, knowing what the Buddha was thinking, went up to him and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tapokammā apakkamma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’ve departed from the practice of mortification </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye na sujjhanti māṇavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by which humans purify themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asuddho maññasi suddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re impure, but think yourself pure; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhimaggā aparaddho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve strayed from the path of purity.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anatthasaṃhitaṃ ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I realized that it’s pointless; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci amaraṃ tapaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">all that mortification in search of immortality </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaṃ natthāvahaṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is as futile </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phiyārittaṃva dhammani. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as oars and rudder on dry land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlaṃ samādhi paññañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ethics, immersion, and wisdom: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maggaṃ bodhāya bhāvayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by developing this path to awakening </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattosmi paramaṃ suddhiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I attained ultimate purity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nihato tvamasi antakā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re beaten, terminator!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti, dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
