<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.09-9. Paṭhamaāyusutta  - 9. Life Span (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.09. 9. Paṭhamaāyusutta  - 9. Life Span (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Life Span </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appamidaṃ, bhikkhave, manussānaṃ āyu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the life span of humans is short. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gamanīyo samparāyo, kattabbaṃ kusalaṃ, caritabbaṃ brahmacariyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You must go to the next life. So you should do what is skillful, you should practice the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi jātassa amaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No-one born is immortal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo, bhikkhave, ciraṃ jīvati, so vassasataṃ appaṃ vā bhiyyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A long life is a hundred years or a little more.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dīghamāyu manussānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The life of humans is long! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na naṃ hīḷe suporiso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A good person wouldn’t scorn it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Careyya khīramattova, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Live like a suckling babe, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi maccussa āgamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for Death has not come for you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appamāyu manussānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The life of humans is short, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hīḷeyya naṃ suporiso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and a good person scorns it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Careyyādittasīsova, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should live as though their head was on fire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi maccussa nāgamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for Death comes for everyone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro … pe … tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra … vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
