<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.16-16. Pattasutta  - 16. The Alms Bowls </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.16. 16. Pattasutta  - 16. The Alms Bowls </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. Rule </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā pañcannaṃ upādānakkhandhānaṃ upādāya bhikkhūnaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk on the topic of the five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca bhikkhū aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasotā dhammaṃ suṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those mendicants were paying heed, paying attention, engaging wholeheartedly, and lending an ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mārassa pāpimato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho samaṇo gotamo pañcannaṃ upādānakkhandhānaṃ upādāya bhikkhūnaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This ascetic Gotama is educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk on the topic of the five grasping aggregates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca bhikkhū aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasotā dhammaṃ suṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the mendicants are paying heed, paying attention, engaging wholeheartedly, and lending an ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ yena samaṇo gotamo tenupasaṅkameyyaṃ vicakkhukammāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I go and pull the wool over their eyes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā pattā abbhokāse nikkhittā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time several alms bowls were placed in the open air. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā balībaddavaṇṇaṃ abhinimminitvā yena te pattā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked manifested in the form of an ox and approached those bowls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu aññataraṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">One of the mendicants said to another, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhu bhikkhu, eso balībaddo patte bhindeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, mendicant, that ox will break the bowls.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhagavā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, the Buddha said to that mendicant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na so, bhikkhu, balībaddo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, that’s no ox. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māro eso pāpimā tumhākaṃ vicakkhukammāya āgato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s Māra the Wicked come to pull the wool over your eyes!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rūpaṃ vedayitaṃ saññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sights, feeling, and perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ yañca saṅkhataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness and what is chosen: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nesohamasmi netaṃ me, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I am not this’ and ‘this is not mine’; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ tattha virajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s how to be free of desire them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ virattaṃ khemattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’re detached, secure, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbasaṃyojanātigaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">all fetters transcended, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anvesaṃ sabbaṭṭhānesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">though Māra and his army chase everywhere </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mārasenāpi nājjhagā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they never find you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā … pe … tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra … vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
