<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.22-22. Samiddhisutta  - 22. With Samiddhi </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.22. 22. Samiddhisutta  - 22. With Samiddhi </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyavagga  - 3. Māra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati silāvatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans near Silāvatī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā samiddhi bhagavato avidūre appamatto ātāpī pahitatto viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Samiddhi was meditating not far from the Buddha, diligent, keen, and resolute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato samiddhissa rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then as Venerable Samiddhi was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“lābhā vata me, suladdhaṃ vata me, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m so fortunate, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa me satthā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to have a teacher who is a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhā vata me, suladdhaṃ vata me, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m so fortunate, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yvāhaṃ evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to have gone forth in a teaching and training so well explained! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhā vata me, suladdhaṃ vata me, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m so fortunate, so very fortunate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa me sabrahmacārino sīlavanto kalyāṇadhammā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to have spiritual companions who are ethical and of good character.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā āyasmato samiddhissa cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya yenāyasmā samiddhi tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmato samiddhissa avidūre mahantaṃ bhayabheravaṃ saddamakāsi, apissudaṃ pathavī maññe undrīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Māra the Wicked, knowing what Samiddhi was thinking, went up to him and made a terrifyingly loud noise close by him. It seemed as if the earth was shattering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā samiddhi yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno āyasmā samiddhi bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Samiddhi went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idhāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavato avidūre appamatto ātāpī pahitatto viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘lābhā vata me, suladdhaṃ vata me, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa me satthā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhā vata me, suladdhaṃ vata me, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yvāhaṃ evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajito. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhā vata me, suladdhaṃ vata me, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa me sabrahmacārino sīlavanto kalyāṇadhammā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, avidūre mahābhayabheravasaddo ahosi, apissudaṃ pathavī maññe undrīyatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nesā, samiddhi, pathavī undrīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Samiddhi, that’s not the earth shattering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māro eso pāpimā tuyhaṃ vicakkhukammāya āgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s Māra the Wicked come to pull the wool over your eyes! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaccha tvaṃ, samiddhi, tattheva appamatto ātāpī pahitatto viharāhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Go back to that same place, Samiddhi, and meditate, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā samiddhi bhagavato paṭissutvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Samiddhi. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho āyasmā samiddhi tattheva appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a second time Samiddhi was meditating in that same place, diligent, ardent, and resolute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho āyasmato samiddhissa rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a second time he had the same thought … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dutiyampi kho māro pāpimā āyasmato samiddhissa cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">and Māra made an earth-shattering noise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apissudaṃ pathavī maññe undrīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā samiddhi māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Samiddhi addressed Māra the Wicked One in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddhāyāhaṃ pabbajito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I went forth out of faith </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">agārasmā anagāriyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sati paññā ca me buddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">My mindfulness and wisdom are mature, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittañca susamāhitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">my mind is serene in immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmaṃ karassu rūpāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Make whatever illusions you want, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">neva maṃ byādhayissasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it won’t bother me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ samiddhi bhikkhū”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The mendicant Samiddhi knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
