<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.08-8. Nandatisutta  - 8. Delighting </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.08. 8. Nandatisutta  - 8. Delighting </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. Life Span </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nandati puttehi puttimā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your children bring you delight! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gomā gobhi tatheva nandati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your cattle also bring you delight! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upadhīhi narassa nandanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For attachments are a man’s delight; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi so nandati yo nirūpadhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">without attachments there’s no delight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Socati puttehi puttimā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your children bring you sorrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gomā gobhi tatheva socati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your cattle also bring you sorrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upadhīhi narassa socanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For attachments are a man’s sorrow; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi so socati yo nirūpadhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">without attachments there are no sorrows.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ bhagavā, jānāti maṃ sugato”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The Buddha knows me! The Holy One knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
