<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>4.25-25. Māradhītusutta  - 25. Māra’s Daughters </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">4.25. 25. Māradhītusutta  - 25. Māra’s Daughters </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Tatiyavagga  - 3. Māra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā bhagavato santike imā nibbejanīyā gāthāyo abhāsitvā tamhā ṭhānā apakkamma bhagavato avidūre pathaviyaṃ pallaṅkena nisīdi tuṇhībhūto maṅkubhūto pattakkhandho adhomukho pajjhāyanto appaṭibhāno kaṭṭhena bhūmiṃ vilikhanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Māra the Wicked, after reciting these verses of disillusionment in the Buddha’s presence, left that place. He sat cross-legged on the ground not far from the Buddha, silent, embarrassed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, scratching the ground with a stick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca arati ca ragā ca māradhītaro yena māro pāpimā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsiṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra’s daughters Craving, Delight, and Lust went up to Māra the Wicked, and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kenāsi dummano tāta, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why so downhearted, dad? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisaṃ kaṃ nu socasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What man are you upset about? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayaṃ taṃ rāgapāsena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We’ll catch him with the snare of lust, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraññamiva kuñjaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like an elephant in the wild. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bandhitvā ānayissāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">We’ll tie him up and bring him back—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vasago te bhavissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’ll fall under your sway!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Arahaṃ sugato loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In this world he is the perfected one, the Holy One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na rāgena suvānayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s not easily seduced by lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māradheyyaṃ atikkanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has gone beyond Māra’s sovereignty; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā socāmahaṃ bhusan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s why I’m so upset.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca arati ca ragā ca māradhītaro yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra’s daughters Craving, Delight, and Lust went up to the Buddha, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pāde te, samaṇa, paricāremā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“We serve at your feet, ascetic.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā na manasākāsi, yathā taṃ anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye vimutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha ignored them, since he was freed with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca arati ca ragā ca māradhītaro ekamantaṃ apakkamma evaṃ samacintesuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Craving, Delight, and Lust withdrew to one side to think up a plan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“uccāvacā kho purisānaṃ adhippāyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Men have a diverse spectrum of tastes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūna mayaṃ ekasataṃ ekasataṃ kumārivaṇṇasataṃ abhinimmineyyāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t we each manifest in the form of a hundred young maidens?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca arati ca ragā ca māradhītaro ekasataṃ ekasataṃ kumārivaṇṇasataṃ abhinimminitvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that’s what they did. Then they went up to the Buddha and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pāde te, samaṇa, paricāremā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“We serve at your feet, ascetic.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tampi bhagavā na manasākāsi, yathā taṃ anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye vimutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha still ignored them, since he was freed with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca arati ca ragā ca māradhītaro ekamantaṃ apakkamma evaṃ samacintesuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Craving, Delight, and Lust withdrew to one side to think up a plan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“uccāvacā kho purisānaṃ adhippāyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Men have a diverse spectrum of tastes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūna mayaṃ ekasataṃ ekasataṃ avijātavaṇṇasataṃ abhinimmineyyāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t we each manifest in the form of a hundred women who have never given birth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca arati ca ragā ca māradhītaro ekasataṃ ekasataṃ avijātavaṇṇasataṃ abhinimminitvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So that’s what they did. Then they went up to the Buddha and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pāde te, samaṇa, paricāremā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“We serve at your feet, ascetic.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tampi bhagavā na manasākāsi, yathā taṃ anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye vimutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha still ignored them, since he was freed with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Craving, Delight, and Lust … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yannūna mayaṃ ekasataṃ ekasataṃ sakiṃ vijātavaṇṇasataṃ abhinimmineyyāmāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakiṃ vijātavaṇṇasataṃ abhinimminitvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">each manifested in the form of a hundred women who have given birth once … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pāde te, samaṇa, paricāremā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tampi bhagavā na manasākāsi, yathā taṃ anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye vimutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yannūna mayaṃ ekasataṃ ekasataṃ duvijātavaṇṇasataṃ abhinimmineyyāmāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duvijātavaṇṇasataṃ abhinimminitvā yena bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">women who have given birth twice … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā taṃ anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye vimutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhimitthivaṇṇasataṃ abhinimmineyyāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhimitthivaṇṇasataṃ abhinimminitvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">middle-aged women … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye vimutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahitthivaṇṇasataṃ abhinimmineyyāmāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahitthivaṇṇasataṃ abhinimminitvā yena bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">old women … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye vimutto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha still ignored them, since he was freed with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca arati ca ragā ca māradhītaro ekamantaṃ apakkamma etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Craving, Delight, and Lust withdrew to one side and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṃ kira no pitā avoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What our father said is true: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Arahaṃ sugato loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In this world he is the perfected one, the Holy One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na rāgena suvānayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s not easily seduced by lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māradheyyaṃ atikkanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has gone beyond Māra’s sovereignty; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmā socāmahaṃ bhusan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s why I’m so upset.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi mayaṃ samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā avītarāgaṃ iminā upakkamena upakkameyyāma hadayaṃ vāssa phaleyya, uṇhaṃ lohitaṃ vā mukhato uggaccheyya, ummādaṃ vā pāpuṇeyya cittakkhepaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For if we had come on to any ascetic or brahmin like this who was not free of lust, his heart would explode, or he’d spew hot blood from his mouth, or he’d go mad and lose his mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathā vā pana naḷo harito luto ussussati visussati milāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’d dry up, wither away, and shrivel up like a green reed that was mowed down.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva ussusseyya visusseyya milāyeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca arati ca ragā ca māradhītaro yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhaṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra’s daughters Craving, Delight, and Lust went up to the Buddha, and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho taṇhā māradhītā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Māra’s daughter Craving addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sokāvatiṇṇo nu vanamhi jhāyasi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are you overwhelmed by sorrow that you meditate in the forest? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vittaṃ nu jīno uda patthayāno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Have you lost a fortune, or do you long for one? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āguṃ nu gāmasmimakāsi kiñci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or perhaps you’ve committed some crime in the village? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā janena na karosi sakkhiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t you get too close to people? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkhī na sampajjati kenaci te”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why does no-one get close to you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthassa pattiṃ hadayassa santiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve reached the goal, peace of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jetvāna senaṃ piyasātarūpaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having conquered the army of the likable and pleasant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekohaṃ jhāyaṃ sukhamanubodhiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">alone, practicing absorption, I awakened to bliss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā janena na karomi sakkhiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I don’t get too close to people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkhī na sampajjati kenaci me”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and no-one gets too close to me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho arati māradhītā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra’s daughter Delight addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃvihārībahulodha bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How does a mendicant who has crossed five floods </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcoghatiṇṇo atarīdha chaṭṭhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">usually meditate here while crossing the sixth? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ jhāyiṃ bahulaṃ kāmasaññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How do they usually practice absorption so that sensual perceptions </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribāhirā honti aladdha yo tan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are kept out and don’t get hold of them?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Passaddhakāyo suvimuttacitto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“With tranquil body and mind well freed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṅkharāno satimā anoko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">without making plans, mindful, homeless; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāya dhammaṃ avitakkajhāyī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">understanding the teaching, they practice absorption without placing the mind; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kuppati na sarati na thino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re not shaking or drifting or rigid. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃvihārībahulodha bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant who has crossed five floods </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcoghatiṇṇo atarīdha chaṭṭhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">usually meditates here while crossing the sixth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ jhāyiṃ bahulaṃ kāmasaññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how they usually practice absorption so that sensual perceptions </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribāhirā honti aladdha yo tan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are kept out and don’t get hold of them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho ragā māradhītā bhagavato santike gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra’s daughter Lust addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchejja taṇhaṃ gaṇasaṅghacārī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He lives with his community after cutting off craving, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addhā carissanti bahū ca saddhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and many of the faithful will cross over for sure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuṃ vatāyaṃ janataṃ anoko, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Alas, this homeless one will snatch many men away, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acchejja nessati maccurājassa pāran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and lead them past the King of Death!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nayanti ve mahāvīrā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The great heroes they lead </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammena tathāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by means of the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammena nayamānānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Realized Ones are leading by the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kā usūyā vijānatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how could anyone who knows be jealous?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho taṇhā ca arati ca ragā ca māradhītaro yena māro pāpimā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra’s daughters Craving, Delight, and Lust went up to Māra the Wicked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho māro pāpimā taṇhañca aratiñca ragañca māradhītaro dūratova āgacchantiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Māra the Wicked saw them coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed them in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bālā kumudanāḷehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Fools! You drill into a mountain </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pabbataṃ abhimatthatha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with lotus stalks! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Giriṃ nakhena khanatha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You dig up a hill with your nails! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayo dantehi khādatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You chew iron with your teeth! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Selaṃva sirasūhacca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You seek a footing in the deeps, as it were, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pātāle gādhamesatha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">while lifting a rock with your head! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khāṇuṃva urasāsajja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After attacking a stump with your breast, as it were, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbijjāpetha gotamā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you leave Gotama disappointed.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Daddallamānā āgañchuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They came in their splendor—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhā ca aratī ragā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving, Delight, and Lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā tattha panudī satthā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Teacher brushed them off right there, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tūlaṃ bhaṭṭhaṃva māluto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the breeze, a fallen tuft.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyo vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sambahulā samiddhi ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Godhikaṃ sattavassāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhītaraṃ desitaṃ buddha, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seṭṭhena imaṃ mārapañcakanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mārasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses with Māra are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
