<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.09-9. Selāsutta  - 9. With Selā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.09. 9. Selāsutta  - 9. With Selā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhunīvagga  - 1. Nuns </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selā bhikkhunī pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Selā robed up in the morning … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle divāvihāraṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sat at the root of a tree for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā selāya bhikkhuniyā bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the nun Selā feel fear, terror, and goosebumps … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">selaṃ bhikkhuniṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">addressed her in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kenidaṃ pakataṃ bimbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who created this puppet? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kvanu bimbassa kārako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where is its maker? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kvanu bimbaṃ samuppannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where has the puppet arisen? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kvanu bimbaṃ nirujjhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And where does it cease?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Selā thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu khvāyaṃ manusso vā amanusso vā gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who’s speaking this verse, a human or a non-human?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then she thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māro kho ayaṃ pāpimā mama bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is Māra the Wicked, wanting to make me feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make me fall away from immersion!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho selā bhikkhunī “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Selā, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nayidaṃ attakataṃ bimbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This puppet isn’t self-made, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nayidaṃ parakataṃ aghaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor is this misery made by another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hetuṃ paṭicca sambhūtaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It comes to be because of a cause, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hetubhaṅgā nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ceases when the cause breaks up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā aññataraṃ bījaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a seed that’s sown </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khette vuttaṃ virūhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in a field; it grows </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathavīrasañcāgamma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">relying on both the soil’s nutrients </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sinehañca tadūbhayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as well as moisture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ khandhā ca dhātuyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way the aggregates and elements </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cha ca āyatanā ime; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and these six sense fields </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hetuṃ paṭicca sambhūtā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">come to be because of a cause, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hetubhaṅgā nirujjhare”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and cease when the cause breaks up.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ selā bhikkhunī”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The nun Selā knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
