<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.03-3. Kisāgotamīsutta  - 3. With Kisāgotamī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.03. 3. Kisāgotamīsutta  - 3. With Kisāgotamī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhunīvagga  - 1. Nuns </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kisāgotamī bhikkhunī pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Kisāgotamī robed up in the morning and, taking her bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā yena andhavanaṃ tenupasaṅkami, upasaṅkamitvā divāvihārāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on her return from alms-round, she went to the Dark Forest, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhavanaṃ ajjhogāhetvā aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle divāvihāraṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">plunged deep into it, and sat at the root of a tree for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā kisāgotamiyā bhikkhuniyā bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo yena kisāgotamī bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā kisāgotamiṃ bhikkhuniṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the nun Kisāgotamī feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make her fall away from immersion, went up to her and addressed her in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu tvaṃ mataputtāva, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why do you sit alone and cry </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekamāsi rudammukhī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as if your children have died? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vanamajjhagatā ekā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve come to the woods all alone—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisaṃ nu gavesasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you must be looking for a man!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kisāgotamiyā bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Kisāgotamī thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu khvāyaṃ manusso vā amanusso vā gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who’s speaking this verse, a human or a non-human?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kisāgotamiyā bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then she thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māro kho ayaṃ pāpimā mama bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is Māra the Wicked, wanting to make me feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make me fall away from immersion!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kisāgotamī bhikkhunī “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Kisāgotamī, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Accantaṃ mataputtāmhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve got over the death of children, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisā etadantikā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I’m finished with men. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na socāmi na rodāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t grieve or lament, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na taṃ bhāyāmi āvuso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I’m not afraid of you, sir! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbattha vihatā nandī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Relishing is destroyed in every respect, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamokkhandho padālito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the mass of darkness is shattered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jetvāna maccuno senaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve defeated the army of death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viharāmi anāsavā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and live without defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ kisāgotamī bhikkhunī”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The nun Kisāgotamī knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
