<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>5.10-10. Vajirāsutta  - 10. With Vajirā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">5.10. 10. Vajirāsutta  - 10. With Vajirā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhunīvagga  - 1. Nuns </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vajirā bhikkhunī pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Vajirā robed up in the morning and, taking her bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā yena andhavanaṃ tenupasaṅkami divāvihārāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on her return from alms-round, she went to the Dark Forest, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhavanaṃ ajjhogāhetvā aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle divāvihāraṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">plunged deep into it, and sat at the root of a tree for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā vajirāya bhikkhuniyā bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo yena vajirā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā vajiraṃ bhikkhuniṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, wanting to make the nun Vajirā feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make her fall away from immersion, went up to her and addressed her in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kenāyaṃ pakato satto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who created this sentient being? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuvaṃ sattassa kārako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where is its maker? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuvaṃ satto samuppanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where has the being arisen? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuvaṃ satto nirujjhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And where does it cease?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vajirāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the nun Vajirā thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu khvāyaṃ manusso vā amanusso vā gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who’s speaking this verse, a human or a non-human?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vajirāya bhikkhuniyā etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then she thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māro kho ayaṃ pāpimā mama bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃsaṃ uppādetukāmo samādhimhā cāvetukāmo gāthaṃ bhāsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is Māra the Wicked, wanting to make me feel fear, terror, and goosebumps, wanting to make me fall away from immersion!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vajirā bhikkhunī “māro ayaṃ pāpimā” iti viditvā, māraṃ pāpimantaṃ gāthāhi paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vajirā, knowing that this was Māra the Wicked, replied to him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu sattoti paccesi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why do you believe there’s such a thing as a ‘sentient being’? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māra diṭṭhigataṃ nu te; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Māra, is this your theory? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suddhasaṅkhārapuñjoyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is just a pile of conditions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nayidha sattupalabbhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you won’t find a sentient being here. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā hi aṅgasambhārā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the parts are assembled </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hoti saddo ratho iti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">we use the word ‘chariot’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ khandhesu santesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So too, when the aggregates are present </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hoti sattoti sammuti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘sentient being’ is the convention we use. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhameva hi sambhoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it’s only suffering that comes to be, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhaṃ tiṭṭhati veti ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">lasts a while, then disappears. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāññatra dukkhā sambhoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Naught but suffering comes to be, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāññaṃ dukkhā nirujjhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">naught but suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā “jānāti maṃ vajirā bhikkhunī”ti dukkhī dummano tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Māra the Wicked, thinking, “The nun Vajirā knows me!” miserable and sad, vanished right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīvaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āḷavikā ca somā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gotamī vijayā saha; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppalavaṇṇā ca cālā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upacālā sīsupacālā ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Selā vajirāya te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīsaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on Nuns are completed.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
