<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.12-12. Devadattasutta  - 12. About Devadatta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.12. 12. Devadattasutta  - 12. About Devadatta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate acirapakkante devadatte. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain, not long after Devadatta had left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ gijjhakūṭaṃ pabbataṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the beautiful Brahmā Sahampati, lighting up the entire Vulture’s Peak, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho brahmā sahampati devadattaṃ ārabbha bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Phalaṃ ve kadaliṃ hanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The banana tree is destroyed by its own fruit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phalaṃ veḷuṃ phalaṃ naḷaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as are the bamboo and the reed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkāro kāpurisaṃ hanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Honor destroys a sinner, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gabbho assatariṃ yathā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as pregnancy destroys a mule.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
