<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.09-9. Turūbrahmasutta  - 9. With the Brahmā Tudu </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.09. 9. Turūbrahmasutta  - 9. With the Brahmā Tudu </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The Appeal </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena kokāliko bhikkhu ābādhiko hoti dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the mendicant Kokālika was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho turū paccekabrahmā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena kokāliko bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā vehāsaṃ ṭhito kokālikaṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the beautiful independent brahmā Tudu, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the mendicant Kokālika, and standing in the air he said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pasādehi, kokālika, sāriputtamoggallānesu cittaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kokālika, have confidence in Sāriputta and Moggallāna, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pesalā sāriputtamoggallānā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re good monks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kosi tvaṃ, āvuso”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who are you, reverend?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahaṃ turū paccekabrahmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am Tudu the independent brahmā.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu tvaṃ, āvuso, bhagavatā anāgāmī byākato, atha kiñcarahi idhāgato? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Didn’t the Buddha declare you a non-returner? So what exactly are you doing back here? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passa, yāvañca te idaṃ aparaddhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">See how far you have strayed!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Purisassa hi jātassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A man is born </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuṭhārī jāyate mukhe; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with an axe in his mouth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāya chindati attānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fool cuts themselves with it </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bālo dubbhāsitaṃ bhaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when they say bad words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo nindiyaṃ pasaṃsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you praise someone worthy of criticism, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vā nindati yo pasaṃsiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or criticize someone worthy of praise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vicināti mukhena so kaliṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you choose bad luck with your own mouth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalinā tena sukhaṃ na vindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll never find happiness that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamattako ayaṃ kali, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bad luck at dice is a trivial thing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo akkhesu dhanaparājayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if all you lose is your money </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbassāpi sahāpi attanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and all you own, even yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva mahantataro kali; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s really terrible luck </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sugatesu manaṃ padosaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is to hate the holy ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sataṃ sahassānaṃ nirabbudānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For more than two quinquadecillion years, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattiṃsati pañca ca abbudāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and another five quattuordecillion years, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yamariyagarahī nirayaṃ upeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a slanderer of noble ones goes to hell, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vācaṃ manañca paṇidhāya pāpakan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having aimed bad words and thoughts at them.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
