<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.06-6. Brahmalokasutta  - 6. The Negligent Brahmā </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.06. 6. Brahmalokasutta  - 6. The Negligent Brahmā </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The Appeal </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā divāvihāragato hoti paṭisallīno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha had gone into retreat for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho subrahmā ca paccekabrahmā suddhāvāso ca paccekabrahmā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā paccekaṃ dvārabāhaṃ upanissāya aṭṭhaṃsu. Atha kho subrahmā paccekabrahmā suddhāvāsaṃ paccekabrahmānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the independent brahmās Subrahmā and Suddhāvāsa went to the Buddha and stationed themselves one by each door-post. But Subrahmā said to Suddhāvāsa, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“akālo kho tāva, mārisa, bhagavantaṃ payirupāsituṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good sir, it’s the wrong time to pay homage to the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">divāvihāragato bhagavā paṭisallīno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has gone into retreat for the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asuko ca brahmaloko iddho ceva phīto ca, brahmā ca tatra pamādavihāraṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But such and such Brahmā realm is successful and prosperous, while the Brahmā living there is negligent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyāma, mārisa, yena so brahmaloko tenupasaṅkamissāma; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ brahmānaṃ saṃvejeyyāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Come, let’s go to that Brahmā realm and inspire awe in that Brahmā!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, mārisā”ti kho suddhāvāso paccekabrahmā subrahmuno paccekabrahmuno paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, good sir,” replied Suddhāvāsa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho subrahmā ca paccekabrahmā suddhāvāso ca paccekabrahmā—seyyathāpi nāma balavā puriso … pe … evameva—bhagavato purato antarahitā tasmiṃ brahmaloke pāturahesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, they vanished from in front of the Buddha and appeared in that Brahmā realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho so brahmā te brahmāno dūratova āgacchante. Disvāna te brahmāno etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">That Brahmā saw those Brahmās coming off in the distance and said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handa kuto nu tumhe, mārisā, āgacchathā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well now, good sirs, where have you come from?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āgatā kho mayaṃ, mārisa, amha tassa bhagavato santikā arahato sammāsambuddhassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good sir, we’ve come from the presence of the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaccheyyāsi pana tvaṃ, mārisa, tassa bhagavato upaṭṭhānaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Shouldn’t you go to attend on that Blessed One?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutto, kho so brahmā taṃ vacanaṃ anadhivāsento sahassakkhattuṃ attānaṃ abhinimminitvā subrahmānaṃ paccekabrahmānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they had spoken, that Brahmā refused to accept their advice. He multiplied himself a thousand times and said to Subrahmā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passasi me no tvaṃ, mārisa, evarūpaṃ iddhānubhāvan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good sir, can’t you see that I have such psychic power?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Passāmi kho tyāhaṃ, mārisa, evarūpaṃ iddhānubhāvan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I see that, good sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“So khvāhaṃ, mārisa, evaṃmahiddhiko evaṃmahānubhāvo kassa aññassa samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā upaṭṭhānaṃ gamissāmī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since I have such psychic power and might, what other ascetic or brahmin should I go to and attend upon?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho subrahmā paccekabrahmā dvisahassakkhattuṃ attānaṃ abhinimminitvā taṃ brahmānaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Subrahmā multiplied himself two thousand times and said to that Brahmā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passasi me no tvaṃ, mārisa, evarūpaṃ iddhānubhāvan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good sir, can’t you see that I have such psychic power?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Passāmi kho tyāhaṃ, mārisa, evarūpaṃ iddhānubhāvan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I see that, good sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayā ca kho, mārisa, mayā ca sveva bhagavā mahiddhikataro ceva mahānubhāvataro ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That Buddha has even more psychic power and might than you or me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaccheyyāsi tvaṃ, mārisa, tassa bhagavato upaṭṭhānaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Shouldn’t you go to attend on that Blessed One?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brahmā subrahmānaṃ paccekabrahmānaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that Brahmā addressed Subrahmā in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayo supaṇṇā caturo ca haṃsā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are three hundreds of phoenixes, four of swans, and five of eagles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byagghīnisā pañcasatā ca jhāyino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This palace belongs to him who practiced absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayidaṃ vimānaṃ jalate ca brahme, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It shines, Brahmā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Obhāsayaṃ uttarassaṃ disāyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">lighting up the northern quarter!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiñcāpi te taṃ jalate vimānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So what if your palace shines, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Obhāsayaṃ uttarassaṃ disāyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">lighting up the northern quarter? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpe raṇaṃ disvā sadā pavedhitaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A clever person who has seen the deficiency in form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā na rūpe ramatī sumedho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">its chronic trembling, takes no pleasure in it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho subrahmā ca paccekabrahmā suddhāvāso ca paccekabrahmā taṃ brahmānaṃ saṃvejetvā tatthevantaradhāyiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then after inspiring awe in that Brahmā, the independent brahmās Subrahmā and Suddhāvāsa vanished right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agamāsi ca kho so brahmā aparena samayena bhagavato upaṭṭhānaṃ arahato sammāsambuddhassāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And after some time that Brahmā went to attend on the Buddha.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
