<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.15-15. Parinibbānasutta  - 15. Final Extinguishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.15. 15. Parinibbānasutta  - 15. Final Extinguishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kusinārāyaṃ viharati upavattane mallānaṃ sālavane antarena yamakasālānaṃ parinibbānasamaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying between a pair of sal trees in the sal forest of the Mallas at Upavattana near Kusinārā at the time of his final extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handa dāni, bhikkhave, āmantayāmi vo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come now, mendicants, I say to you all: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vayadhammā saṅkhārā, appamādena sampādethā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Conditions fall apart. Persist with diligence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ tathāgatassa pacchimā vācā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These were the Realized One’s last words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Paṭhamā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Dutiyā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Tatiyā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā catutthaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Catutthā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samāpajji. Ākāsānañcāyatanā vuṭṭhahitvā viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samāpajji. Viññāṇañcāyatanā vuṭṭhahitvā ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samāpajji. Ākiñcaññāyatanā vuṭṭhahitvā nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samāpajji. Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanā vuṭṭhahitvā saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpajji. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha entered the first absorption. Emerging from that, he entered the second absorption. Emerging from that, he successively entered into and emerged from the third absorption, the fourth absorption, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness, and the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. Then he entered the cessation of perception and feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saññāvedayitanirodhā vuṭṭhahitvā nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samāpajji. Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanā vuṭṭhahitvā ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samāpajji. Ākiñcaññāyatanā vuṭṭhahitvā viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samāpajji. Viññāṇañcāyatanā vuṭṭhahitvā ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samāpajji. Ākāsānañcāyatanā vuṭṭhahitvā catutthaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Catutthā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Tatiyā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Dutiyā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Paṭhamā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Dutiyā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Tatiyā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā catutthaṃ jhānaṃ samāpajji. Catutthā jhānā vuṭṭhahitvā samanantaraṃ bhagavā parinibbāyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling and entered the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. Emerging from that, he successively entered into and emerged from the dimension of nothingness, the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of infinite space, the fourth absorption, the third absorption, the second absorption, and the first absorption. Emerging from that, he successively entered into and emerged from the second absorption and the third absorption. Then he entered the fourth absorption. Emerging from that the Buddha immediately became fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbute bhagavati saha parinibbānā brahmā sahampati imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha became fully extinguished, along with the full extinguishment, Brahmā Sahampati recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sabbeva nikkhipissanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“All creatures in this world </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhūtā loke samussayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">must lay down this bag of bones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha etādiso satthā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For even a Teacher such as this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">loke appaṭipuggalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">unrivaled in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgato balappatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Realized One, attained to power, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambuddho parinibbuto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddha became fully extinguished.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbute bhagavati saha parinibbānā sakko devānamindo imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha became fully extinguished, Sakka, lord of gods, recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccā vata saṅkhārā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Oh! Conditions are impermanent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppādavayadhammino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their nature is to rise and fall; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppajjitvā nirujjhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having arisen, they cease; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṃ vūpasamo sukho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their stilling is true bliss.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbute bhagavati saha parinibbānā āyasmā ānando imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha became fully extinguished, Venerable Ānanda recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tadāsi yaṃ bhiṃsanakaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then there was terror! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tadāsi lomahaṃsanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they had goosebumps! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbākāravarūpete, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha, endowed with all fine qualities, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambuddhe parinibbute”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">became fully extinguished.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbute bhagavati saha parinibbānā āyasmā anuruddho imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha became fully extinguished, Venerable Anuruddha recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhu assāsapassāso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There was no more breathing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhitacittassa tādino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the poised one of steady heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anejo santimārabbha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Imperturbable, committed to peace, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhumā parinibbuto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the seer became fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asallīnena cittena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He put up with painful feelings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ ajjhavāsayi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">without flinching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pajjotasseva nibbānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The liberation of his heart </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimokkho cetaso ahū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">was like the extinguishing of a lamp.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyo vaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmāsanaṃ devadatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhakavindo aruṇavatī; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbānena ca desitaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ brahmapañcakanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses on Brahmā are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
