<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.03-3. Brahmadevasutta  - 3. With Brahmadeva </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.03. 3. Brahmadevasutta  - 3. With Brahmadeva </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The Appeal </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarissā brāhmaṇiyā brahmadevo nāma putto bhagavato santike agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a certain brahmin lady had a son called Brahmadeva, who had gone forth from the lay life to homelessness in the presence of the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā brahmadevo eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto viharanto nacirasseva—yassatthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṃ—brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Brahmadeva, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā”ti abbhaññāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is no return to any state of existence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro ca panāyasmā brahmadevo arahataṃ ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Brahmadeva became one of the perfected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā brahmadevo pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmadeva robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ sapadānaṃ piṇḍāya caramāno yena sakamātu nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wandering indiscriminately for alms-food in Sāvatthī, he approached his own mother’s house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato brahmadevassa mātā brāhmaṇī brahmuno āhutiṃ niccaṃ paggaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Brahmadeva’s mother, the brahmin lady, was offering up a regular oblation to Brahmā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmuno sahampatissa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmā Sahampati thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho āyasmato brahmadevassa mātā brāhmaṇī brahmuno āhutiṃ niccaṃ paggaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This Venerable Brahmadeva’s mother, the brahmin lady, offers up a regular oblation to Brahmā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ taṃ upasaṅkamitvā saṃvejeyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I go and stir up a sense of urgency in her?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati—seyyathāpi nāma balavā puriso samiñjitaṃ vā bāhaṃ pasāreyya, pasāritaṃ vā bāhaṃ samiñjeyya; evameva—brahmaloke antarahito āyasmato brahmadevassa mātu nivesane pāturahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the Brahmā realm and reappeared in the house of Brahmadeva’s mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sahampati vehāsaṃ ṭhito āyasmato brahmadevassa mātaraṃ brāhmaṇiṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmā Sahampati, while standing in the air, addressed Brahmadeva’s mother in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dūre ito brāhmaṇi brahmaloko, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Far from here is the Brahmā realm, madam, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāhutiṃ paggaṇhāsi niccaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to which you offer a regular oblation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netādiso brāhmaṇi brahmabhakkho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But Brahmā doesn’t eat that kind of food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ jappasi brahmapathaṃ ajānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why make invocations, when you don’t know the path to Brahmā? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso hi te brāhmaṇi brahmadevo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This Brahmadeva, madam, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirūpadhiko atidevapatto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">free of attachments, has surpassed the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiñcano bhikkhu anaññaposī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant without possessions or dependents, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo te so piṇḍāya gharaṃ paviṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has entered your house for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhuneyyo vedagu bhāvitatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, a knowledge master, self-developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Narānaṃ devānañca dakkhiṇeyyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s worthy of a religious donation from gods and men. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bāhitvā pāpāni anūpalitto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having shunned all evils, he’s unsullied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ghāsesanaṃ iriyati sītibhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Cool at heart, he wanders looking for food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tassa pacchā na puratthamatthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has no before and after, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santo vidhūmo anigho nirāso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">peaceful, unclouded, untroubled, with no need for hope, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nikkhittadaṇḍo tasathāvaresu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has laid down the rod for all creatures firm and frail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tyāhutiṃ bhuñjatu aggapiṇḍaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So let him enjoy your offering of choice alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visenibhūto upasantacitto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With peaceful mind, he has left the crowd, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāgova danto carati anejo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he wanders like a tamed elephant, unperturbed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu susīlo suvimuttacitto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s a mendicant fair in ethics, with heart well freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tyāhutiṃ bhuñjatu aggapiṇḍaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So let him enjoy your offering of choice alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ pasannā avikampamānā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With unwavering confidence in him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patiṭṭhapehi dakkhiṇaṃ dakkhiṇeyye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">present your religious donation to one who is worthy of it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karohi puññaṃ sukhamāyatikaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now that you’ve seen the sage who has crossed over, madam, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā muniṃ brāhmaṇi oghatiṇṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">make merit for the sake of future happiness!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ pasannā avikampamānā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With unwavering confidence in him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patiṭṭhapesi dakkhiṇaṃ dakkhiṇeyye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">she presented her religious donation to one who is worthy of it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akāsi puññaṃ sukhamāyatikaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After seeing the sage who had crossed over, the brahmin lady </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā muniṃ brāhmaṇī oghatiṇṇan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">made merit for the sake of future happiness.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
