<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.11-11. Sanaṅkumārasutta  - 11. With Sanaṅkumāra </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.11. 11. Sanaṅkumārasutta  - 11. With Sanaṅkumāra </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati sappinītīre. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the bank of the Sappinī river. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sanaṅkumāro abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇo kevalakappaṃ sappinītīraṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, the beautiful Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, lighting up the entire Sappinī riverbank, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ ṭhito kho brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and recited this verse in the Buddha’s presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khattiyo seṭṭho janetasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The aristocrat is best of those people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye gottapaṭisārino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who take clan as the standard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjācaraṇasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so seṭṭho devamānuse”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is best of gods and humans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca brahmā sanaṅkumāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanuñño satthā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teacher approved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho brahmā sanaṅkumāro “samanuñño me satthā”ti bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, knowing that the teacher approved, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
