<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.13-13. Devahitasutta  - 13. With Devahita </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.13. 13. Devahitasutta  - 13. With Devahita </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā vātehābādhiko hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was afflicted by winds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmā ca upavāṇo bhagavato upaṭṭhāko hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Upavāṇa was his carer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ upavāṇaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Upavāṇa, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“iṅgha me tvaṃ, upavāṇa, uṇhodakaṃ jānāhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, Upavāṇa, find some hot water for me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā upavāṇo bhagavato paṭissutvā nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena devahitassa brāhmaṇassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā tuṇhībhūto ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Upavāṇa. He robed up, and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the house of the brahmin Devahita, and stood silently to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho devahito brāhmaṇo āyasmantaṃ upavāṇaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ ekamantaṃ ṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Devahita saw him standing there </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna āyasmantaṃ upavāṇaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tuṇhībhūto bhavaṃ tiṭṭhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Silent stands the Master, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muṇḍo saṅghāṭipāruto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">shaven, wrapped in his outer robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ patthayāno kiṃ esaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you want? What are you looking for? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kiṃ nu yācitumāgato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What have you come here to ask for?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Arahaṃ sugato loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The perfected one, the Holy One in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vātehābādhiko muni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the sage is afflicted by winds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace uṇhodakaṃ atthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If there’s hot water, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">munino dehi brāhmaṇa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">give it to the sage, brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pūjito pūjaneyyānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I wish to bring it to the one </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkareyyāna sakkato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who is esteemed by the estimable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apacito apaceyyānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">honored by the honorable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa icchāmi hātave”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">venerated by the venerable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho devahito brāhmaṇo uṇhodakassa kājaṃ purisena gāhāpetvā phāṇitassa ca puṭaṃ āyasmato upavāṇassa pādāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Devahita had a man fetch a carrying-pole with hot water. He also presented Upavāṇa with a jar of molasses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upavāṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ uṇhodakena nhāpetvā uṇhodakena phāṇitaṃ āloletvā bhagavato pādāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Upavāṇa went up to the Buddha and bathed him with the hot water. Then he stirred molasses into hot water and presented it to the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato ābādho paṭippassambhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha’s illness died down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho devahito brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Devahita went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho devahito brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kattha dajjā deyyadhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Where should you give an available gift? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kattha dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where is a gift very fruitful? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi yajamānassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How does one who is donating </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃ ijjhati dakkhiṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">ensure the success of their religious donation?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbenivāsaṃ yo vedī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“One who knows their past lives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saggāpāyañca passati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sees heaven and places of loss, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho jātikkhayaṃ patto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has attained the ending of rebirth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhiññāvosito muni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that sage has perfect insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettha dajjā deyyadhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here you should give an available gift; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettha dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">what’s given here is very fruitful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi yajamānassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a sponsor of sacrifices </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ ijjhati dakkhiṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">ensures the success of their religious donation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, devahito brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Devahita said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
