<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.03-3. Asurindakasutta  - 3. With Bharadvāja the Fiend </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.03. 3. Asurindakasutta  - 3. With Bharadvāja the Fiend </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Arahantavagga  - 1. The Perfected Ones </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho asurindakabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmin Bharadvāja the Fiend heard a rumor effect that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhāradvājagotto brāhmaṇo kira samaṇassa gotamassa santike agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito”ti kupito anattamano yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ asabbhāhi pharusāhi vācāhi akkosati paribhāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a brahmin of the Bharadvāja clan had gone forth from the lay life to homelessness in the presence of the ascetic Gotama. Angry and displeased he went to the Buddha and abused and insulted him with rude, harsh words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhagavā tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when he said this, the Buddha kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho asurindakabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Bharadvāja the Fiend said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“jitosi, samaṇa, jitosi, samaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re beaten, ascetic, you’re beaten!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jayaṃ ve maññati bālo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘Ha! I won!’ thinks the fool, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vācāya pharusaṃ bhaṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">when speaking with harsh words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jayañcevassa taṃ hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Patience is the true victory </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā titikkhā vijānato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for those who understand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva tena pāpiyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you get angry at an angry person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo kuddhaṃ paṭikujjhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you just make things worse for yourself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuddhaṃ appaṭikujjhanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you don’t get angry at an angry person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgāmaṃ jeti dujjayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you win a battle hard to win. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhinnamatthaṃ carati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you know that the other is angry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ca parassa ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you act for the good of both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paraṃ saṅkupitaṃ ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">yourself and the other </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo sato upasammati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you’re mindful and stay calm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhinnaṃ tikicchantānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">People unskilled in Dhamma </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ca parassa ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">consider one who heals both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Janā maññanti bāloti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">oneself and the other </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye dhammassa akovidā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to be a fool.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, asurindakabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, Bharadvāja the Fiend said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abbhaññāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro ca panāyasmā bhāradvājo arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Bhāradvāja became one of the perfected.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
