<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.22-22. Khomadussasutta  - 22. At Khomadussa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.22. 22. Khomadussasutta  - 22. At Khomadussa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati khomadussaṃ nāmaṃ sakyānaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, where they have a town named Khomadussa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya khomadussaṃ nigamaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Khomadussa for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena khomadussakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā sabhāyaṃ sannipatitā honti kenacideva karaṇīyena, devo ca ekamekaṃ phusāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmins and householders of Khomadussa were gathered in the council hall for some business, while a gentle rain drizzled down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā yena sā sabhā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha approached that council. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasaṃsu khomadussakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmins and householders saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ke ca muṇḍakā samaṇakā, ke ca sabhādhammaṃ jānissantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who are these shavelings, these fake ascetics? Don’t they understand the council rules?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā khomadussake brāhmaṇagahapatike gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha addressed the brahmins and householders of Khomadussa in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nesā sabhā yattha na santi santo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If good people are not present it is no true council; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santo na te ye na vadanti dhammaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and those whose speak against principle are not good people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgañca dosañca pahāya mohaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having given up greed, hate, and delusion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaṃ vadantā ca bhavanti santo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">speakers of principle are good people.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, khomadussakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Khomadussa said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho gotama, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā gotamena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete mayaṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāma dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">We go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsake no bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupete saraṇaṃ gate”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakavaggo dutiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasi udayo devahito, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataramahāsālaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mānatthaddhaṃ paccanīkaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navakammi kaṭṭhahāraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātuposakaṃ bhikkhako, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgāravo ca khomadussena dvādasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brāhmaṇasaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Linked Discourses with Brahmins are complete.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
