<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.15-15. Mānatthaddhasutta  - 15. Stuck-Up </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.15. 15. Mānatthaddhasutta  - 15. Stuck-Up </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena mānatthaddho nāma brāhmaṇo sāvatthiyaṃ paṭivasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a brahmin named Stuck-Up was residing in Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So neva mātaraṃ abhivādeti, na pitaraṃ abhivādeti, na ācariyaṃ abhivādeti, na jeṭṭhabhātaraṃ abhivādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He didn’t bow to his mother or father, his teacher, or his oldest brother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā mahatiyā parisāya parivuto dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time the Buddha was teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mānatthaddhassa brāhmaṇassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Stuck-Up thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho samaṇo gotamo mahatiyā parisāya parivuto dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama is teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ yena samaṇo gotamo tenupasaṅkameyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I approach him? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace maṃ samaṇo gotamo ālapissati, ahampi taṃ ālapissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he speaks to me, I’ll speak to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce maṃ samaṇo gotamo ālapissati, ahampi nālapissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he doesn’t speak, neither will I.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mānatthaddho brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā tuṇhībhūto ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Stuck-Up went up to the Buddha, and stood silently to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā taṃ nālapi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha didn’t speak to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mānatthaddho brāhmaṇo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Stuck-Up thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāyaṃ samaṇo gotamo kiñci jānātī”ti tatova puna nivattitukāmo ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This ascetic Gotama knows nothing!” And he wanted to go back from there right away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā mānatthaddhassa brāhmaṇassa cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya mānatthaddhaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing what Stuck-Up was thinking, addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na mānaṃ brāhmaṇa sādhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s not good to foster conceit </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthikassīdha brāhmaṇa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you want what’s good for you, brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena atthena āgacchi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should foster the goal </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamevamanubrūhaye”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">which brought you here.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mānatthaddho brāhmaṇo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Stuck-Up thought,</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“cittaṃ me samaṇo gotamo jānātī”ti tattheva bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavato pādāni mukhena ca paricumbati pāṇīhi ca parisambāhati, nāmañca sāveti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama knows my mind!” He bowed with his head to the Buddha’s feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name:</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mānatthaddhāhaṃ, bho gotama, mānatthaddhāhaṃ, bho gotamā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, I am Stuck-Up! I am Stuck-Up!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā parisā abbhutavittajātā ahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that assembly was stunned:</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ vata bho, abbhutaṃ vata bho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayañhi mānatthaddho brāhmaṇo neva mātaraṃ abhivādeti, na pitaraṃ abhivādeti, na ācariyaṃ abhivādeti, na jeṭṭhabhātaraṃ abhivādeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This brahmin Stuck-Up doesn’t bow to his mother or father, his teacher, or his oldest brother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha ca pana samaṇe gotame evarūpaṃ paramanipaccakāraṃ karotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet he shows such utmost devotion to the ascetic Gotama!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā mānatthaddhaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to the brahmin Stuck-Up,</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṃ, brāhmaṇa, uṭṭhehi, sake āsane nisīda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Enough, brahmin. Get up, and take your own seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato te mayi cittaṃ pasannan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For your mind has confidence in me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mānatthaddho brāhmaṇo sake āsane nisīditvā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Stuck-Up took his seat and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kesu na mānaṃ kayirātha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Regarding whom should you not be conceited? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kesu cassa sagāravo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who should you respect? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kyassa apacitā assu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who should you esteem? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kyassu sādhu supūjitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is it good to venerate properly?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mātari pitari cāpi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Your mother and father, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho jeṭṭhamhi bhātari; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and also your oldest brother, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ācariye catutthamhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with teacher as fourth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesu na mānaṃ kayirātha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Regarding these you should not be conceited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesu assa sagāravo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are who you should respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tyassa apacitā assu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are who you should esteem. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tyassu sādhu supūjitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they’re who it’s good to venerate properly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arahante sītībhūte, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when you’ve humbled conceit, and aren’t stuck-up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katakicce anāsave; </span></p>
<p class="p3">show supreme reverence for </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nihacca mānaṃ athaddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the perfected ones, cooled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te namasse anuttare”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their task complete, free of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, mānatthaddho brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Stuck-Up said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
