<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.05-5. Ahiṃsakasutta  - 5. Harmless </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.05. 5. Ahiṃsakasutta  - 5. Harmless </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Arahantavagga  - 1. The Perfected Ones </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho ahiṃsakabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Harmless went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho ahiṃsakabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahiṃsakāhaṃ, bho gotama, ahiṃsakāhaṃ, bho gotamā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am Harmless, Master Gotama, I am Harmless!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā nāmaṃ tathā cassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If you were really like your name, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā kho tvaṃ ahiṃsako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">then you’d be Harmless. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca kāyena vācāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a truly harmless person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā ca na hiṃsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">does no harm by way of </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve ahiṃsako hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">body, speech, or mind; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo paraṃ na vihiṃsatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t harm anyone else.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, ahiṃsakabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Harmless said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abbhaññāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro ca panāyasmā ahiṃsakabhāradvājo arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Bhāradvāja the Harmless became one of the perfected.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
