<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.16-16. Paccanīkasutta  - 16. The Contraphile </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.16. 16. Paccanīkasutta  - 16. The Contraphile </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena paccanīkasāto nāma brāhmaṇo sāvatthiyaṃ paṭivasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a brahmin named Contraphile, who loved contradiction, was residing in Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho paccanīkasātassa brāhmaṇassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Contraphile thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yannūnāhaṃ yena samaṇo gotamo tenupasaṅkameyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why don’t I go to the ascetic Gotama and </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ yadeva samaṇo gotamo bhāsissati taṃ tadevassāhaṃ paccanīkāssan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">contradict everything he says?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā abbhokāse caṅkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the Buddha was walking meditation in the open air. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho paccanīkasāto brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ caṅkamantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Contraphile went up to the Buddha, and said to him as he was walking meditation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhaṇa samaṇadhamman”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ascetic, preach the Dhamma.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na paccanīkasātena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Fine words aren’t easy to understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suvijānaṃ subhāsitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by a lover of contradiction, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upakkiliṭṭhacittena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose mind is tainted </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhabahulena ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and full of aggression. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca vineyya sārambhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when you’ve dispelled aggression, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appasādañca cetaso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and your suspicious mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āghātaṃ paṭinissajja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and you’ve got rid of resentment, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sa ve jaññā subhāsitan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then you’ll understand fine words.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, paccanīkasāto brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Contraphile said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
