<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.07-7. Suddhikasutta  - 7. With Bhāradvāja the Pure </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.07. 7. Suddhikasutta  - 7. With Bhāradvāja the Pure </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Arahantavagga  - 1. The Perfected Ones </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho suddhikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Pure went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho suddhikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and recited this verse in his presence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na brāhmaṇo sujjhati koci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No brahmin in the world is ever purified </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Loke sīlavāpi tapokaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">even though he’s ethical and mortifies himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjācaraṇasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sujjhati na aññā itarā pajā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is purified, not these commoners.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bahumpi palapaṃ jappaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Even one who mutters many invocations </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jaccā hoti brāhmaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is no brahmin by birth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antokasambu saṅkiliṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">if they’re filthy and corrupt within, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuhanaṃ upanissito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">supporting themselves by fraud. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khattiyo brāhmaṇo vesso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Regardless of whether you’re an aristocrat, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suddo caṇḍālapukkuso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a brahmin, merchant, worker, or an outcaste or scavenger—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraddhavīriyo pahitatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you’re energetic and resolute, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niccaṃ daḷhaparakkamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">always staunchly vigorous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pappoti paramaṃ suddhiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll attain the highest happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ jānāhi brāhmaṇā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Know that for a fact, brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, suddhikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Pure said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññataro ca panāyasmā bhāradvājo arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Bhāradvāja became one of the perfected.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
