<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.06-6. Jaṭāsutta  - 6. With Bhāradvāja of the Matted Hair </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.06. 6. Jaṭāsutta  - 6. With Bhāradvāja of the Matted Hair </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Arahantavagga  - 1. The Perfected Ones </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho jaṭābhāradvājo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Bhāradvāja of the Matted Hair went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho jaṭābhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Antojaṭā bahijaṭā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Matted hair within, matted hair without: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jaṭāya jaṭitā pajā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">these people are tangled up in matted hair. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ taṃ gotama pucchāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I ask you this, Gotama: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko imaṃ vijaṭaye jaṭan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who can untangle this tangled mass?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sīle patiṭṭhāya naro sapañño, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A wise man grounded in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ paññañca bhāvayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">developing the mind and wisdom, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ātāpī nipako bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a keen and alert mendicant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ vijaṭaye jaṭaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">can untangle this tangled mass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṃ rāgo ca doso ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For those who have discarded </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjā ca virājitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">greed, hate, and ignorance—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavā arahanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the perfected ones with defilements ended—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṃ vijaṭitā jaṭā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the tangle has been untangled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha nāmañca rūpañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where name and form </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asesaṃ uparujjhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">cease with nothing left over; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭighaṃ rūpasaññā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and impingement and perception of form: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etthesā chijjate jaṭā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s there that the tangle is cut.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, jaṭābhāradvājo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, Bhāradvāja of the Matted Hair said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññataro ca panāyasmā bhāradvājo arahataṃ ahosī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Bhāradvāja became one of the perfected.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
