<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.14-14. Mahāsālasutta  - 14. A well-to-do brahmin </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.14. 14. Mahāsālasutta  - 14. A well-to-do brahmin </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇamahāsālo lūkho lūkhapāvuraṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a certain well-to-do brahmin, shabby, wearing a shabby cloak, went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho taṃ brāhmaṇamahāsālaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṃ nu tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, lūkho lūkhapāvuraṇo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, why are you so shabby, wearing a shabby cloak?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha me, bho gotama, cattāro puttā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, I have four sons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te maṃ dārehi sampuccha gharā nikkhāmentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At their wives’ bidding they expelled me from my house.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, imā gāthāyo pariyāpuṇitvā sabhāyaṃ mahājanakāye sannipatite puttesu ca sannisinnesu bhāsassu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, brahmin, memorize these verses and recite them to your sons when you are all seated in the council hall with a large crowd. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yehi jātehi nandissaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I was overjoyed when they were born, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yesañca bhavamicchisaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and wished for them the very best. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te maṃ dārehi sampuccha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But at their wives’ bidding they chased me out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāva vārenti sūkaraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like hounds after hogs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asantā kira maṃ jammā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It turns out they’re wicked, those nasty men, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāta tātāti bhāsare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">though they called me their dear old Dad. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rakkhasā puttarūpena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re monsters in the shape of sons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te jahanti vayogataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">throwing me out as I’ve grown old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assova jiṇṇo nibbhogo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Like an old, useless horse </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khādanā apanīyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">led away from its fodder, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bālakānaṃ pitā thero, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the elderly father of those kids </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parāgāresu bhikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">begs for alms at others’ homes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daṇḍova kira me seyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even my staff is better </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañce puttā anassavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">than those disobedient sons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṇḍampi goṇaṃ vāreti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">for it wards off a wild bull, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho caṇḍampi kukkuraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and even a wild dog. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhakāre pure hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It goes before me in the dark; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gambhīre gādhamedhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in deep waters it supports me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daṇḍassa ānubhāvena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By the wonderful power of this staff, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khalitvā patitiṭṭhatī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">when I stumble, I stand firm again.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇamahāsālo bhagavato santike imā gāthāyo pariyāpuṇitvā sabhāyaṃ mahājanakāye sannipatite puttesu ca sannisinnesu abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having memorized those verses in the Buddha’s presence, the brahmin recited them to his sons when they were all seated in the council hall with a large crowd. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yehi jātehi nandissaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yesañca bhavamicchisaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te maṃ dārehi sampuccha, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāva vārenti sūkaraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asantā kira maṃ jammā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāta tātāti bhāsare; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rakkhasā puttarūpena, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te jahanti vayogataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assova jiṇṇo nibbhogo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khādanā apanīyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bālakānaṃ pitā thero, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parāgāresu bhikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daṇḍova kira me seyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañce puttā anassavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṇḍampi goṇaṃ vāreti, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho caṇḍampi kukkuraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhakāre pure hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gambhīre gādhamedhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daṇḍassa ānubhāvena, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khalitvā patitiṭṭhatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho naṃ brāhmaṇamahāsālaṃ puttā gharaṃ netvā nhāpetvā paccekaṃ dussayugena acchādesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin’s sons led him back home, bathed him, and each clothed him with a fine pair of garments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇamahāsālo ekaṃ dussayugaṃ ādāya yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin, taking one pair of garments, went to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho brāhmaṇamahāsālo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mayaṃ, bho gotama, brāhmaṇā nāma ācariyassa ācariyadhanaṃ pariyesāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, we brahmins seek a fee for our teacher. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggaṇhatu me bhavaṃ gotamo ācariyadhanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May Master Gotama please accept my teacher’s fee!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggahesi bhagavā anukampaṃ upādāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha accepted it out of compassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇamahāsālo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the well-to-do brahmin said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
