<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.11-11. Kasibhāradvājasutta  - 11. With Bhāradvāja the Farmer </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.11. 11. Kasibhāradvājasutta  - 11. With Bhāradvāja the Farmer </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā magadhesu viharati dakkhiṇāgirismiṃ ekanāḷāyaṃ brāhmaṇagāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Magadhans in the Southern Hills near the brahmin village of Ekanāḷa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena kasibhāradvājassa brāhmaṇassa pañcamattāni naṅgalasatāni payuttāni honti vappakāle. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Farmer had harnessed around five hundred plows, it being the season for sowing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena kasibhāradvājassa brāhmaṇassa kammanto tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to where Bhāradvāja the Farmer was working. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena kasibhāradvājassa brāhmaṇassa parivesanā vattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Bhāradvāja the Farmer was distributing food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā yena parivesanā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha went to where the distribution was taking place and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho kasibhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ piṇḍāya ṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bhāradvāja the Farmer saw him standing for alms </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṃ kho, samaṇa, kasāmi ca vapāmi ca, kasitvā ca vapitvā ca bhuñjāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I plough and sow, ascetic, and then I eat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tvampi, samaṇa, kasassu ca vapassu ca, kasitvā ca vapitvā ca bhuñjassū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You too should plough and sow, then you may eat.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahampi kho, brāhmaṇa, kasāmi ca vapāmi ca, kasitvā ca vapitvā ca bhuñjāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I too plough and sow, brahmin, and then I eat.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho mayaṃ passāma bhoto gotamassa yugaṃ vā naṅgalaṃ vā phālaṃ vā pācanaṃ vā balībadde vā, atha ca pana bhavaṃ gotamo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t see Master Gotama with a yoke or plow or plowshare or goad or oxen, yet he says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahampi kho, brāhmaṇa, kasāmi ca vapāmi ca, kasitvā ca vapitvā ca bhuñjāmī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I too plough and sow, brahmin, and then I eat.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho kasibhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Bhāradvāja the Farmer addressed the Buddha in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kassako paṭijānāsi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You claim to be a farmer, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca passāmi te kasiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">but I don’t see your plough. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassako pucchito brūhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you’re a farmer, declare to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṃ jānemu taṃ kasin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how are we to understand your farming?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddhā bījaṃ tapo vuṭṭhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Faith is my seed, austerity my rain, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā me yuganaṅgalaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and wisdom is my yoke and plough. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hirī īsā mano yottaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Conscience is my pole, mind my strap, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati me phālapācanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">mindfulness my plowshare and goad. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyagutto vacīgutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Guarded in body and speech, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āhāre udare yato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I restrict my intake of food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṃ karomi niddānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I use truth as my scythe, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">soraccaṃ me pamocanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and gentleness is my release. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyaṃ me dhuradhorayhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Energy is my beast of burden, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yogakkhemādhivāhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">transporting me to a place of sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gacchati anivattantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It goes without turning back </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha gantvā na socati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to the place where there is no sorrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamesā kasī kaṭṭhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to do the farming </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā hoti amatapphalā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that has the Deathless as its fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ kasiṃ kasitvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you finish this farming </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbadukkhā pamuccatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re released from all suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhuñjatu bhavaṃ gotamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Eat, Master Gotama, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassako bhavaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you are truly a farmer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi bhavaṃ gotamo amatapphalampi kasiṃ kasatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For Master Gotama does the farming that has the Deathless as its fruit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gāthābhigītaṃ me abhojaneyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Food enchanted by a spell isn’t fit for me to eat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sampassataṃ brāhmaṇa nesa dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s not the way of those who see, brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāthābhigītaṃ panudanti buddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddhas reject things enchanted with spells. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme sati brāhmaṇa vuttiresā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since nature is real, brahmin, that’s how they live. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena ca kevalinaṃ mahesiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Serve with other food and drink </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavaṃ kukkuccavūpasantaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the consummate one, the great hermit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Annena pānena upaṭṭhahassu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with defilements ended and remorse stilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettañhi taṃ puññapekkhassa hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For he is the field for the seeker of merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, kasibhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Farmer said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
