<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.08-8. Aggikasutta  - 8. With Bhāradvāja the Fire-Worshipper </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.08. 8. Aggikasutta  - 8. With Bhāradvāja the Fire-Worshipper </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Arahantavagga  - 1. The Perfected Ones </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aggikabhāradvājassa brāhmaṇassa sappinā pāyaso sannihito hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time ghee and milk-rice had been set out for the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Fire-Worshipper, who thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aggiṃ juhissāmi, aggihuttaṃ paricarissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I will serve the sacred flame! I will perform the fire sacrifice!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya rājagahaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Rājagaha for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājagahe sapadānaṃ piṇḍāya caramāno yena aggikabhāradvājassa brāhmaṇassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wandering indiscriminately for alms-food in Rājagaha, he approached Bhāradvāja the Fire-Worshiper’s house and stood to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho aggikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ piṇḍāya ṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bhāradvāja the Fire-Worshipper saw him standing for alms </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed him in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi vijjāhi sampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“One who’s accomplished in the three knowledges, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātimā sutavā bahū; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of good lineage and ample learning, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjācaraṇasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">accomplished in knowledge and conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">somaṃ bhuñjeyya pāyasan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">may enjoy this milk-rice.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bahumpi palapaṃ jappaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Even one who mutters many invocations </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jaccā hoti brāhmaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is no brahmin by birth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antokasambu saṅkiliṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">if they’re filthy and corrupt within, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuhanāparivārito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with a following gained by fraud. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbenivāsaṃ yo vedī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But one who knows their past lives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saggāpāyañca passati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sees heaven and places of loss, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho jātikkhayaṃ patto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has attained the ending of rebirth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhiññāvosito muni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that sage has perfect insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etāhi tīhi vijjāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of these three knowledges </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tevijjo hoti brāhmaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a brahmin is a master of the three knowledges. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjācaraṇasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Accomplished in knowledge and conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">somaṃ bhuñjeyya pāyasan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may enjoy this milk-rice.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhuñjatu bhavaṃ gotamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Eat, Master Gotama! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brāhmaṇo bhavan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you are truly a brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gāthābhigītaṃ me abhojaneyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Food enchanted by a spell isn’t fit for me to eat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sampassataṃ brāhmaṇa nesa dhammo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s not the way of those who see, brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāthābhigītaṃ panudanti buddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddhas reject things enchanted with spells. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme sati brāhmaṇa vuttiresā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since nature is real, brahmin, that’s how they live. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena ca kevalinaṃ mahesiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Serve with other food and drink </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīṇāsavaṃ kukkuccavūpasantaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the consummate one, the great hermit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Annena pānena upaṭṭhahassu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with defilements ended and remorse stilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettañhi taṃ puññapekkhassa hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For he is the field for the seeker of merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aggikabhāradvājo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the brahmin Bhāradvāja the Fire-Worshipper said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññataro ca panāyasmā aggikabhāradvājo arahataṃ ahosīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Venerable Bhāradvāja the Fire-Worshipper became one of the perfected.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
