<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.19-19. Mātuposakasutta  - 19. The Brahmin Who Provided for His Mother </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.19. 19. Mātuposakasutta  - 19. The Brahmin Who Provided for His Mother </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Upāsakavagga  - 2. Lay Followers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mātuposako brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a brahmin who provided for his mother went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho mātuposako brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahañhi, bho gotama, dhammena bhikkhaṃ pariyesāmi, dhammena bhikkhaṃ pariyesitvā mātāpitaro posemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, I seek alms by legitimate means, which I use to provide for my mother and father. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaccāhaṃ, bho gotama, evaṅkārī kiccakārī homī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In doing so, am I doing my duty?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha tvaṃ, brāhmaṇa, evaṅkārī kiccakārī hosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, brahmin, in so doing you are doing your duty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, brāhmaṇa, dhammena bhikkhaṃ pariyesati, dhammena bhikkhaṃ pariyesitvā mātāpitaro poseti, bahuṃ so puññaṃ pasavatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever seeks alms by legitimate means, and uses them to provide for their mother and father makes much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo mātaraṃ pitaraṃ vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mortal provides for their mother </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">macco dhammena posati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and father by legitimate means; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya naṃ pāricariyāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">because they look after </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāpitūsu paṇḍitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their parents like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idheva naṃ pasaṃsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re praised in this life by the astute, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pecca sagge pamodatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they depart to rejoice in heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, mātuposako brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the brahmin who provided for his mother said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
