<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.05-5. Subhāsitasutta  - 5. Well-Spoken Words </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.05. 5. Subhāsitasutta  - 5. Well-Spoken Words </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgatā vācā subhāsitā hoti, no dubbhāsitā; anavajjā ca ananuvajjā ca viññūnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, speech that has four factors is well spoken, not poorly spoken. It’s blameless and is not criticized by sensible people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu subhāsitaṃyeva bhāsati no dubbhāsitaṃ, dhammaṃyeva bhāsati no adhammaṃ, piyaṃyeva bhāsati no appiyaṃ, saccaṃyeva bhāsati no alikaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant speaks well, not poorly; they speak on the teaching, not against the teaching; they speak pleasantly, not unpleasantly; and they speak truthfully, not falsely. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi aṅgehi samannāgatā vācā subhāsitā hoti, no dubbhāsitā, anavajjā ca ananuvajjā ca viññūnan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Speech with these four factors is well spoken, not poorly spoken. It’s blameless and is not criticized by sensible people.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Subhāsitaṃ uttamamāhu santo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good people say that well-spoken words are foremost; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaṃ bhaṇe nādhammaṃ taṃ dutiyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">second, speak on the teaching, not against it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyaṃ bhaṇe nāppiyaṃ taṃ tatiyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">third, speak pleasantly, not unpleasantly; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṃ bhaṇe nālikaṃ taṃ catutthan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and fourth, speak truthfully, not falsely.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭibhāti maṃ, bhagavā, paṭibhāti maṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to speak, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭibhātu taṃ, vaṅgīsā”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then speak as you feel inspired,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso bhagavantaṃ sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vaṅgīsa extolled the Buddha in his presence with fitting verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tameva vācaṃ bhāseyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Speak only such words </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāyattānaṃ na tāpaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as do not hurt yourself </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pare ca na vihiṃseyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor harm others; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā ve vācā subhāsitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">such speech is truly well spoken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyavācaṃva bhāseyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Speak only pleasing words, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā vācā paṭinanditā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">words gladly welcomed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ anādāya pāpāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasing words are those </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paresaṃ bhāsate piyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that bring nothing bad to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saccaṃ ve amatā vācā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Truth itself is the undying word: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">esa dhammo sanantano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is an ancient principle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacce atthe ca dhamme ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good people say that the teaching and its meaning </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āhu santo patiṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are grounded in the truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ buddho bhāsate vācaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The words spoken by the Buddha </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khemaṃ nibbānapattiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for realizing the sanctuary, extinguishment, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhassantakiriyāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">for making an end of suffering: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā ve vācānamuttamā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this really is the best kind of speech.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
