<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.07-7. Pavāraṇāsutta  - 7. The Invitation to Admonish </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.07. 7. Pavāraṇāsutta  - 7. The Invitation to Admonish </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi sabbeheva arahantehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother, together with a large Saṅgha of around five hundred monks, all of whom were perfected ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā tadahuposathe pannarase pavāraṇāya bhikkhusaṅghaparivuto abbhokāse nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the full moon on the fifteenth day—and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks for the invitation to admonish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tuṇhībhūtaṃ bhikkhusaṅghaṃ anuviloketvā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of monks, who were so very silent. He addressed them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handa dāni, bhikkhave, pavāremi vo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come now, monks, I invite you all: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca me kiñci garahatha kāyikaṃ vā vācasikaṃ vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is there anything I’ve done by way of body or speech that you would criticize?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā sāriputto uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, Venerable Sāriputta got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kho mayaṃ, bhante, bhagavato kiñci garahāma kāyikaṃ vā vācasikaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is nothing, sir, that you’ve done by way of body or speech that we would criticize. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā hi, bhante, anuppannassa maggassa uppādetā, asañjātassa maggassa sañjanetā, anakkhātassa maggassa akkhātā, maggaññū maggavidū maggakovido. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the Blessed One is the one who gave rise to the unarisen path, who gave birth to the unborn path, who explained the unexplained path. He is the knower of the path, the discoverer of the path, the expert on the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maggānugā ca, bhante, etarahi sāvakā viharanti pacchā samannāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And now the disciples live following the path; they acquire it later. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahañca kho, bhante, bhagavantaṃ pavāremi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And sir, I invite the Blessed One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca me bhagavā kiñci garahati kāyikaṃ vā vācasikaṃ vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is there anything I’ve done by way of body or speech that you would criticize?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvāhaṃ te, sāriputta, kiñci garahāmi kāyikaṃ vā vācasikaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is nothing, Sāriputta, that you’ve done by way of body or speech that I would criticize. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṇḍito tvaṃ, sāriputta, mahāpañño tvaṃ, sāriputta, puthupañño tvaṃ, sāriputta, hāsapañño tvaṃ, sāriputta, javanapañño tvaṃ, sāriputta, tikkhapañño tvaṃ, sāriputta, nibbedhikapañño tvaṃ, sāriputta. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta, you are astute. You have great wisdom, widespread wisdom, laughing wisdom, swift wisdom, sharp wisdom, penetrating wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, rañño cakkavattissa jeṭṭhaputto pitarā pavattitaṃ cakkaṃ sammadeva anuppavatteti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wheel-turning monarch’s oldest son rightly keeps wielding the power set in motion by his father. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho tvaṃ, sāriputta, mayā anuttaraṃ dhammacakkaṃ pavattitaṃ sammadeva anuppavattesī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, Sāriputta rightly keeps rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No ce kira me, bhante, bhagavā kiñci garahati kāyikaṃ vā vācasikaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since it seems I have done nothing worthy of the Blessed One’s criticism, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ pana, bhante, bhagavā pañcannaṃ bhikkhusatānaṃ na kiñci garahati kāyikaṃ vā vācasikaṃ vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is there anything these five hundred monks have done by way of body or speech that you would criticize?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imesampi khvāhaṃ, sāriputta, pañcannaṃ bhikkhusatānaṃ na kiñci garahāmi kāyikaṃ vā vācasikaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is nothing, Sāriputta, that these five hundred monks have done by way of body or speech that I would criticize. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesañhi, sāriputta, pañcannaṃ bhikkhusatānaṃ saṭṭhi bhikkhū tevijjā, saṭṭhi bhikkhū chaḷabhiññā, saṭṭhi bhikkhū ubhatobhāgavimuttā, atha itare paññāvimuttā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For of these five hundred monks, sixty have the three knowledges, sixty have the six direct knowledges, sixty are freed both ways, and the rest are freed by wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭibhāti maṃ, bhagavā, paṭibhāti maṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to speak, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭibhātu taṃ, vaṅgīsā”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then speak as you feel inspired,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso bhagavantaṃ sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vaṅgīsa extolled the Buddha in his presence with fitting verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajja pannarase visuddhiyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Today, on the fifteenth day sabbath, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū pañcasatā samāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">five hundred monks have gathered together to purify their precepts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojanabandhanacchidā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These untroubled sages have cut off their fetters and bonds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anīghā khīṇapunabbhavā isī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they will not be reborn again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkavattī yathā rājā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a wheel-turning monarch </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amaccaparivārito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">surrounded by ministers </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samantā anupariyeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">travels all around this </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāgarantaṃ mahiṃ imaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">land that’s girt by sea. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vijitasaṅgāmaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So disciples with the three knowledges, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthavāhaṃ anuttaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">destroyers of death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvakā payirupāsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">revere the winner of the battle, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tevijjā maccuhāyino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the unsurpassed caravan leader. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe bhagavato puttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">All are sons of the Blessed One—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">palāpettha na vijjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">there is no rubbish here. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāsallassa hantāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I bow to the Kinsman of the Sun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vande ādiccabandhunan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">destroyer of the dart of craving.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
