<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.01-1. Nikkhantasutta  - 1. Renounced </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.01. 1. Nikkhantasutta  - 1. Renounced </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā vaṅgīso āḷaviyaṃ viharati aggāḷave cetiye āyasmatā nigrodhakappena upajjhāyena saddhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Vaṅgīsa was staying near Āḷavī, at the Aggāḷava Tree-shrine, together with his mentor, Venerable Nigrodhakappa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā vaṅgīso navako hoti acirapabbajito ohiyyako vihārapālo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Vaṅgīsa was junior, recently gone forth. He had been left behind to look after the dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā itthiyo samalaṅkaritvā yena aggāḷavako ārāmo tenupasaṅkamiṃsu vihārapekkhikāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several women dressed in all their finery went to the monastery at Aggāḷava in order to inspect the dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato vaṅgīsassa tā itthiyo disvā anabhirati uppajjati, rāgo cittaṃ anuddhaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When Vaṅgīsa saw them he became dissatisfied, with lust infecting his mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato vaṅgīsassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alābhā vata me, na vata me lābhā; dulladdhaṃ vata me, na vata me suladdhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s my loss, my misfortune, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa me anabhirati uppannā, rāgo cittaṃ anuddhaṃseti, taṃ kutettha labbhā, yaṃ me paro anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I’ve become dissatisfied, with lust infecting my mind. How is it possible for someone else to dispel my discontent and give rise to satisfaction? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ attanāva attano anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādeyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I do it myself?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso attanāva attano anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādetvā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imā gāthāyo abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, on the occasion of dispelling his own discontent and giving rise to satisfaction, he recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nikkhantaṃ vata maṃ santaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now that I’ve renounced </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">agārasmānagāriyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the home life for homelessness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vitakkā upadhāvanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m overrun </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pagabbhā kaṇhato ime. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by the impudent thoughts of the Dark One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uggaputtā mahissāsā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even if a thousand mighty princes and great archers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhitā daḷhadhammino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">well trained, with strong bows, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samantā parikireyyuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">were to completely surround me; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sahassaṃ apalāyinaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I would never flee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacepi etato bhiyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And even if women come, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āgamissanti itthiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">many more than that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva maṃ byādhayissanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they won’t scare me, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhamme samhi patiṭṭhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for I stand firm in the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkhī hi me sutaṃ etaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I heard this with my own ears </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhassādiccabandhuno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">from the Buddha, Kinsman of the Sun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbānagamanaṃ maggaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">about the path going to extinguishment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha me nirato mano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s what delights my mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañce maṃ viharantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wicked One, if you come near me </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpima upagacchasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as I meditate like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā maccu karissāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll make sure that you, Death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me maggampi dakkhasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">won’t even see the path I take.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
