<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.10-10. Moggallānasutta  - 10. With Moggallāna </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.10. 10. Moggallānasutta  - 10. With Moggallāna </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati isigilipasse kāḷasilāyaṃ mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi sabbeheva arahantehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying on the slopes of Isigili at the Black Rock, together with a large Saṅgha of around five hundred mendicants, all of whom were perfected ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ sudaṃ āyasmā mahāmoggallāno cetasā cittaṃ samannesati vippamuttaṃ nirupadhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thereupon, with his mind, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna checked to see whose mind was liberated and free of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato vaṅgīsassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho bhagavā rājagahe viharati isigilipasse kāḷasilāyaṃ mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi sabbeheva arahantehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha is staying on the slopes of Isigili … with five hundred perfected ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṃ sudaṃ āyasmā mahāmoggallāno cetasā cittaṃ samannesati vippamuttaṃ nirupadhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahāmoggallāna is checking to see whose mind is liberated and free of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ āyasmantaṃ mahāmoggallānaṃ bhagavato sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthaveyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I extoll him in the Buddha’s presence with fitting verses?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭibhāti maṃ, bhagavā, paṭibhāti maṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to speak, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭibhātu taṃ, vaṅgīsā”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then speak as you feel inspired,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso āyasmantaṃ mahāmoggallānaṃ bhagavato sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vaṅgīsa extolled Mahāmoggallāna in his presence with fitting verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nagassa passe āsīnaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“As the sage, who has gone beyond suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muniṃ dukkhassa pāraguṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">sits upon the mountain slope, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvakā payirupāsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">he is revered by disciples with the three knowledges, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tevijjā maccuhāyino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">destroyers of death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te cetasā anupariyeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Moggallāna, of great psychic power, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Moggallāno mahiddhiko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">comprehends with his mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ nesaṃ samannesaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">scrutinizing their minds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vippamuttaṃ nirūpadhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">liberated, without attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ sabbaṅgasampannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they revere Gotama, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muniṃ dukkhassa pāraguṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the sage gone beyond suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anekākārasampannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who is endowed with all path factors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Payirupāsanti gotaman”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and with a multitude of attributes.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
