<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.08-8. Parosahassasutta  - 8. Over a Thousand </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.08. 8. Parosahassasutta  - 8. Over a Thousand </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vaṅgīsavagga  - 1. With Vaṅgīsa </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ aḍḍhatelasehi bhikkhusatehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery, together with a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā bhikkhū nibbānapaṭisaṃyuttāya dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Buddha was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk about extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca bhikkhū aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasotā dhammaṃ suṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those mendicants were paying heed, paying attention, engaging wholeheartedly, and lending an ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato vaṅgīsassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ kho bhagavā bhikkhū nibbānapaṭisaṃyuttāya dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha is educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk about extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ca bhikkhū aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbacetasā samannāharitvā ohitasotā dhammaṃ suṇanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And those mendicants are paying heed, paying attention, engaging wholeheartedly, and lending an ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ bhagavantaṃ sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthaveyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I extoll him in his presence with fitting verses?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Vaṅgīsa got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭibhāti maṃ, bhagavā, paṭibhāti maṃ, sugatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to speak, Holy One!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭibhātu taṃ, vaṅgīsā”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then speak as you feel inspired,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā vaṅgīso bhagavantaṃ sammukhā sāruppāhi gāthāhi abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Vaṅgīsa extolled the Buddha in his presence with fitting verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Parosahassaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Over a thousand mendicants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sugataṃ payirupāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">revere the Holy One </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Desentaṃ virajaṃ dhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">as he teaches the immaculate Dhamma, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbānaṃ akutobhayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">extinguishment, fearing nothing from any quarter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇanti dhammaṃ vimalaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They listen to the immaculate Dhamma </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsambuddhadesitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">taught by the fully awakened Buddha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sobhati vata sambuddho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddha is so brilliant, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhusaṅghapurakkhato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">at the fore of the mendicant Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāganāmosi bhagavā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Blessed One, your name is ‘Giant’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">isīnaṃ isisattamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seventh of the sages. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāmeghova hutvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You are like a great cloud </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvake abhivassati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that rains on your disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Divāvihārā nikkhamma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve left my day’s meditation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthudassanakamyatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">out of desire to see the teacher. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvako te mahāvīra, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Great hero, your disciple Vaṅgīsa </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāde vandati vaṅgiso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">bows at your feet.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu te, vaṅgīsa, imā gāthāyo pubbe parivitakkitā, udāhu ṭhānasova taṃ paṭibhantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Vaṅgīsa, had you previously composed these verses, or did they spring to mind in the moment?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho me, bhante, imā gāthāyo pubbe parivitakkitā, atha kho ṭhānasova maṃ paṭibhantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They sprang to mind in the moment, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi taṃ, vaṅgīsa, bhiyyoso mattāya pubbe aparivitakkitā gāthāyo paṭibhantū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Vaṅgīsa, speak some more spontaneously inspired verses.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā vaṅgīso bhagavato paṭissutvā bhiyyoso mattāya bhagavantaṃ pubbe aparivitakkitāhi gāthāhi abhitthavi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Vaṅgīsa. Then he extolled the Buddha with some more spontaneously inspired verses, not previously composed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ummaggapathaṃ mārassa abhibhuyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Having overcome Māra’s devious path, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Carasi pabhijja khilāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you wander with hard-heartedness dissolved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ passatha bandhapamuñcakaraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">See him, the liberator from bonds, unattached, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asitaṃ bhāgaso pavibhajaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">analyzing the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Oghassa nittharaṇatthaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has explained in many ways </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anekavihitaṃ maggaṃ akkhāsi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the path to cross the flood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiñce amate akkhāte, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The seers of Dhamma stand unfaltering </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaddasā ṭhitā asaṃhīrā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the deathless you’ve explained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pajjotakaro ativijjha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The bringer of light who has pierced the truth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaṭṭhitīnaṃ atikkamamaddasa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ve seen what lies beyond all states of being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñatvā ca sacchikatvā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you saw and realized this for yourself, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggaṃ so desayi dasaddhānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you taught it first to the group of five. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ sudesite dhamme, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Dhamma has been so well taught, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pamādo vijānataṃ dhammaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">how could those who know it be negligent? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi tassa bhagavato sāsane, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So being diligent, we should always respectfully train </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamatto sadā namassamanusikkhe”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the Buddha’s teaching.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
