<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.09-9. Vajjiputtasutta  - 9. A Vajji </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.09. 9. Vajjiputtasutta  - 9. A Vajji </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ aññataro vajjiputtako bhikkhu vesāliyaṃ viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain Vajjian mendicant was staying near Vesālī in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena vesāliyaṃ vajjiputtako sabbaratticāro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Vajjis were holding an all-night event in Vesālī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu vesāliyā tūriyatāḷitavāditanigghosasaddaṃ sutvā paridevamāno tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that mendicant, groaning at the noise of musical instruments being beaten and played, on that occasion recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ekakā mayaṃ araññe viharāma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“We dwell alone in the wilderness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaviddhaṃva vanasmiṃ dārukaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a cast-off log in the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etādisikāya rattiyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">On a night like this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko su nāmamhehi pāpiyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s worse off than me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā tassa bhikkhuno anukampikā atthakāmā taṃ bhikkhuṃ saṃvejetukāmā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deity haunting that forest had compassion for that mendicant, and wanted what’s best for them. So they approached that mendicant wanting to stir them up, and addressed them in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ekakova tvaṃ araññe viharasi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You dwell alone in the wilderness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaviddhaṃva vanasmiṃ dārukaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a cast-off log in the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa te bahukā pihayanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Lots of people are jealous of you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nerayikā viya saggagāminan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like beings in hell of those going to heaven.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu tāya devatāya saṃvejito saṃvegamāpādīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Impelled by that deity, that mendicant was struck with a sense of urgency.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
