<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.13-13. Pākatindriyasutta  - 13. Undisciplined Faculties </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.13. 13. Pākatindriyasutta  - 13. Undisciplined Faculties </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ sambahulā bhikkhū kosalesu viharanti aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe uddhatā unnaḷā capalā mukharā vikiṇṇavācā muṭṭhassatino asampajānā asamāhitā vibbhantacittā pākatindriyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time several mendicants were staying in the Kosalan lands in a certain forest grove. They were restless, insolent, fickle, gossipy, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ anukampikā atthakāmā te bhikkhū saṃvejetukāmā yena te bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te bhikkhū gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deity haunting that forest had compassion for those mendicants, and wanted what’s best for them. So they approached those mendicants wanting to stir them up, and addressed them in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sukhajīvino pure āsuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The mendicants used to live happily, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhū gotamasāvakā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as disciples of Gotama. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anicchā piṇḍamesanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Desireless they sought alms; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anicchā sayanāsanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">desireless they used their lodgings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Loke aniccataṃ ñatvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that the world was impermanent </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhassantaṃ akaṃsu te. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they made an end of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dupposaṃ katvā attānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But now they’ve made themselves hard to look after, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāme gāmaṇikā viya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like chiefs in a village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhutvā bhutvā nipajjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They eat and eat and then lie down, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parāgāresu mucchitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">unconscious in the homes of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃghassa añjaliṃ katvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having raised my joined palms to the Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idhekacce vadāmahaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I speak here only about certain people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaviddhā anāthā te, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re rejects, with no protector, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā petā tatheva te. </span></p>
<p class="p3">just like those who have passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kho pamattā viharanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m speaking about </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te me sandhāya bhāsitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who live negligently. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye appamattā viharanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">To those who live diligently </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">namo tesaṃ karomahan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I pay homage.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū tāya devatāya saṃvejitā saṃvegamāpādunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Impelled by that deity, those mendicants were struck with a sense of urgency.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
