<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.10-10. Sajjhāyasutta  - 10. Recitation </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.10. 10. Sajjhāyasutta  - 10. Recitation </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ aññataro bhikkhu kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time one of the mendicants was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena so bhikkhu yaṃ sudaṃ pubbe ativelaṃ sajjhāyabahulo viharati so aparena samayena appossukko tuṇhībhūto saṅkasāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time that mendicant had previously been spending too much time in recitation. But some time later they adhered to passivity and silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā tassa bhikkhuno dhammaṃ asuṇantī yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not hearing the teaching, the deity haunting that forest approached that mendicant, and addressed them in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kasmā tuvaṃ dhammapadāni bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, why don’t you recite passages of the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nādhīyasi bhikkhuhi saṃvasanto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">living together with other mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvāna dhammaṃ labhatippasādaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you hear the teaching confidence grows; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭheva dhamme labhatippasaṃsan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the reciter is praised in the present life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahu pure dhammapadesu chando, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I used to be enthusiastic about passages of the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva virāgena samāgamimha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">so long as I’d not realized dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato virāgena samāgamimha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But then I realized dispassion, which the good call </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kiñci diṭṭhaṃva sutaṃ mutaṃ vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the laying to rest by completely understanding </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāya nikkhepanamāhu santo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever is seen, heard, and thought.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
