<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.04-4. Sambahulasutta  - 4. Several Mendicants Set Out Wandering </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.04. 4. Sambahulasutta  - 4. Several Mendicants Set Out Wandering </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ sambahulā bhikkhū kosalesu viharanti aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time several mendicants were staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū vassaṃvuṭṭhā temāsaccayena cārikaṃ pakkamiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then after completing the three months of the rainy season residence, those mendicants set out wandering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā te bhikkhū apassantī paridevamānā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not seeing those mendicants, the deity haunting that forest cried. And on that occasion they recited this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Arati viya mejja khāyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Seeing so many vacated seats today, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuke disvāna vivitte āsane; </span></p>
<p class="p3">it seems to me that they must have become dissatisfied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te cittakathā bahussutā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They were so learned, such brilliant speakers! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kome gotamasāvakā gatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where have these disciples of Gotama gone?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññatarā devatā taṃ devataṃ gāthāya paccabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they had spoken, another deity replied with this verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Māgadhaṃ gatā kosalaṃ gatā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They’ve gone to Magadha, they’ve gone to Kosala, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekacciyā pana vajjibhūmiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and some are in the Vajjian lands. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Magā viya asaṅgacārino, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Like deer that wander free of ties, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aniketā viharanti bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mendicants live with no abode.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
