<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.11-11. Akusalavitakkasutta  - 11. Unskillful Thoughts </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.11. 11. Akusalavitakkasutta  - 11. Unskillful Thoughts </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ aññataro bhikkhu kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time one of the mendicants was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena so bhikkhu divāvihāragato pāpake akusale vitakke vitakketi, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time that mendicant, during their day’s meditation, was thinking bad, unskillful thoughts, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmavitakkaṃ, byāpādavitakkaṃ, vihiṃsāvitakkaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā tassa bhikkhuno anukampikā atthakāmā taṃ bhikkhuṃ saṃvejetukāmā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deity haunting that forest had compassion for that mendicant, and wanted what’s best for them. So they approached that mendicant wanting to stir them up, and addressed them in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayoniso manasikārā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because of improper attention, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so vitakkehi khajjasi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re consumed by your thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayoniso paṭinissajja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’ve given up irrationality, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yoniso anucintaya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">make sure your thoughts are rational. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthāraṃ dhammamārabbha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking about the Teacher, the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghaṃ sīlāni attano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha, and your own ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhigacchasi pāmojjaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll find gladness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītisukhamasaṃsayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and rapture and bliss as well, no doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato pāmojjabahulo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when you’re full of joy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhassantaṃ karissasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll make an end to suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu tāya devatāya saṃvejito saṃvegamāpādīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Impelled by that deity, that mendicant was struck with a sense of urgency.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
