<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.05-5. Ānandasutta  - 5. With Ānanda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.05. 5. Ānandasutta  - 5. With Ānanda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā ānando kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā ānando ativelaṃ gihisaññattibahulo viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Ānanda was spending too much time informing the lay people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā āyasmato ānandassa anukampikā atthakāmā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ saṃvejetukāmā yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the deity haunting that forest had compassion for Ānanda, wanting what’s best for him. So they approached him wanting to stir him up, and recited these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rukkhamūlagahanaṃ pasakkiya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’ve left for the jungle, the root of a tree, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbānaṃ hadayasmiṃ opiya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with quenching in your heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jhāya gotama mā pamādo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Practice absorption, Gotama, don’t be negligent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ te biḷibiḷikā karissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is this hullabaloo to you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando tāya devatāya saṃvejito saṃvegamāpādīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Impelled by that deity, Venerable Ānanda was struck with a sense of urgency.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
