<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.02-2. Upaṭṭhānasutta  - 2. Getting Up </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.02. 2. Upaṭṭhānasutta  - 2. Getting Up </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Vanavagga  - 1. In the Woods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ aññataro bhikkhu kosalesu viharati aññatarasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time one of the mendicants was staying in the land of the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena so bhikkhu divāvihāragato supati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time that mendicant fell asleep during the day’s meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho yā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe adhivatthā devatā tassa bhikkhuno anukampikā atthakāmā taṃ bhikkhuṃ saṃvejetukāmā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deity haunting that forest had compassion for that mendicant, and wanted what’s best for them. So they approached that mendicant wanting to stir them up, and addressed them in verse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Uṭṭhehi bhikkhu kiṃ sesi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get up, mendicant! Why lie down? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko attho supitena te; </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s the point in your sleeping? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āturassa hi kā niddā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What slumber can there be for those afflicted, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sallaviddhassa ruppato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">injured, pierced by an arrow? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāya saddhāya pabbajito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should amplify the faith </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">agārasmānagāriyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that led you to go forth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tameva saddhaṃ brūhehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">from the home life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā niddāya vasaṃ gamī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t fall under the sway of slumber.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccā addhuvā kāmā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sensual pleasures are impermanent and unstable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yesu mandova mucchito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">but idiots still fall for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Baddhesu muttaṃ asitaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Among those who are bound, they’re free and unattached: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kasmā pabbajitaṃ tape. </span></p>
<p class="p3">why bother a renunciate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandarāgassa vinayā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By removing desire and greed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjāsamatikkamā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by going beyond ignorance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ ñāṇaṃ paramodānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that knowledge has been perfectly cleansed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kasmā pabbajitaṃ tape. </span></p>
<p class="p3">why bother a renunciate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chetvā avijjaṃ vijjāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By breaking ignorance with knowledge, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āsavānaṃ parikkhayā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by the ending of defilements, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asokaṃ anupāyāsaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re sorrowless, unstressed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kasmā pabbajitaṃ tape. </span></p>
<p class="p3">why bother a renunciate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraddhavīriyaṃ pahitattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Energetic, resolute, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niccaṃ daḷhaparakkamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">always staunchly vigorous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbānaṃ abhikaṅkhantaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">aspiring to extinguishment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā pabbajitaṃ tape”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">why bother a renunciate?”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
