<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.02-2. Vibhaṅgasutta  - 2. Analysis </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.02. 2. Vibhaṅgasutta  - 2. Analysis </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Buddhavagga  - 1. The Buddhas </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṭiccasamuppādaṃ vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi vibhajissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach and analyze for you dependent origination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhikkhave, paṭiccasamuppādo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what is dependent origination? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāpaccayā, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is a condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a condition for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is a condition for name and form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The six sense fields are conditions for contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassapaccayā vedanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contact is a condition for feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāpaccayā taṇhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling is a condition for craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a condition for grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānapaccayā bhavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Grasping is a condition for continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavapaccayā jāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, jarāmaraṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is old age and death? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tesaṃ tesaṃ sattānaṃ tamhi tamhi sattanikāye jarā jīraṇatā khaṇḍiccaṃ pāliccaṃ valittacatā āyuno saṃhāni indriyānaṃ paripāko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati jarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called old age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tesaṃ tesaṃ sattānaṃ tamhā tamhā sattanikāyā cuti cavanatā bhedo antaradhānaṃ maccu maraṇaṃ kālakiriyā khandhānaṃ bhedo kaḷevarassa nikkhepo (), </span></p>
<p class="p3">The passing away, perishing, disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, and laying to rest of the corpse of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati maraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti ayañca jarā, idañca maraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is old age, and such is death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, jarāmaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, jāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is rebirth? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tesaṃ tesaṃ sattānaṃ tamhi tamhi sattanikāye jāti sañjāti okkanti abhinibbatti khandhānaṃ pātubhāvo āyatanānaṃ paṭilābho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The rebirth, inception, conception, reincarnation, manifestation of the aggregates, and acquisition of the sense fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, jāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, bhavo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is continued existence? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayome, bhikkhave, bhavā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these three states of existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmabhavo, rūpabhavo, arūpabhavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Existence in the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, and the formless realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, upādānaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is grasping? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, upādānāni—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these four kinds of grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmupādānaṃ, diṭṭhupādānaṃ, sīlabbatupādānaṃ, attavādupādānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, upādānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, taṇhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is craving? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, taṇhākāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpataṇhā, saddataṇhā, gandhataṇhā, rasataṇhā, phoṭṭhabbataṇhā, dhammataṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, taṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, vedanā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is feeling? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, vedanākāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhusamphassajā vedanā, sotasamphassajā vedanā, ghānasamphassajā vedanā, jivhāsamphassajā vedanā, kāyasamphassajā vedanā, manosamphassajā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling born of contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, phasso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is contact? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, phassakāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhusamphasso, sotasamphasso, ghānasamphasso, jivhāsamphasso, kāyasamphasso, manosamphasso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, phasso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, saḷāyatanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the six sense fields? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhāyatanaṃ, sotāyatanaṃ, ghānāyatanaṃ, jivhāyatanaṃ, kāyāyatanaṃ, manāyatanaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sense fields of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, saḷāyatanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the six sense fields. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, nāmarūpaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are name and form? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vedanā, saññā, cetanā, phasso, manasikāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling, perception, intention, contact, and attention. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati nāmaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called name. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāro ca mahābhūtā, catunnañca mahābhūtānaṃ upādāyarūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The four primary elements, and form derived from the four primary elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati rūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti idañca nāmaṃ, idañca rūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is name and such is form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nāmarūpaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called name and form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is consciousness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, bhikkhave, viññāṇakāyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six classes of consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhuviññāṇaṃ, sotaviññāṇaṃ, ghānaviññāṇaṃ, jivhāviññāṇaṃ, kāyaviññāṇaṃ, manoviññāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are choices? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayome, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are three kinds of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyasaṅkhāro, vacīsaṅkhāro, cittasaṅkhāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, avijjā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is ignorance? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dukkhe aññāṇaṃ, dukkhasamudaye aññāṇaṃ, dukkhanirodhe aññāṇaṃ, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya aññāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, avijjā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, ignorance is a condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a condition for consciousness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
