<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.37-37. Natumhasutta  - 37. Not Yours </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.37. 37. Natumhasutta  - 37. Not Yours </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Kaḷārakhattiyavagga  - 4. Kaḷāra the Aristocrat </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāyaṃ, bhikkhave, kāyo tumhākaṃ napi aññesaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, this body doesn’t belong to you or to anyone else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purāṇamidaṃ, bhikkhave, kammaṃ abhisaṅkhataṃ abhisañcetayitaṃ vedaniyaṃ daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s old deeds, and should be seen as produced by choices and intentions, as something to be felt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako paṭiccasamuppādaññeva sādhukaṃ yoniso manasi karoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">A learned noble disciple carefully and properly attends to dependent origination itself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iti imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti, imassuppādā idaṃ uppajjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When this exists, that is; due to the arising of this, that arises. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imasmiṃ asati idaṃ na hoti, imassa nirodhā idaṃ nirujjhati, yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When this doesn’t exist, that is not; due to the cessation of this, that ceases. That is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is a condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a condition for consciousness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
