<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.82-82. Satthusutta  - 82. The Teacher </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.82. 82. Satthusutta  - 82. The Teacher </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Antarapeyyāla  - 9. Incorporated Abbreviation Series </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jarāmaraṇaṃ, bhikkhave, ajānatā apassatā yathābhūtaṃ jarāmaraṇe yathābhūtaṃ ñāṇāya satthā pariyesitabbo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, one who does not truly know or see old age and death should seek the Teacher so as to truly know old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ ajānatā apassatā yathābhūtaṃ jarāmaraṇasamudaye yathābhūtaṃ ñāṇāya satthā pariyesitabbo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who does not truly know or see the origin of old age and death should seek the Teacher so as to truly know the origin of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ ajānatā apassatā yathābhūtaṃ jarāmaraṇanirodhe yathābhūtaṃ ñāṇāya satthā pariyesitabbo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who does not truly know or see the cessation of old age and death should seek the Teacher so as to truly know the cessation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ ajānatā apassatā yathābhūtaṃ jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya yathābhūtaṃ ñāṇāya satthā pariyesitabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who does not truly know or see the practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death should seek the Teacher so as to truly know the practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Suttanto eko.) (82:353) </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Sabbesaṃ peyyālo evaṃ vitthāretabbo.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">(All the abbreviated texts should be expanded in full.)</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
