<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.33-33. Ñāṇavatthusutta  - 33. Grounds for Knowledge </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.33. 33. Ñāṇavatthusutta  - 33. Grounds for Knowledge </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Kaḷārakhattiyavagga  - 4. Kaḷāra the Aristocrat </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catucattārīsaṃ vo, bhikkhave, ñāṇavatthūni desessāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach forty-four grounds for knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamāni, bhikkhave, catucattārīsaṃ ñāṇavatthūni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what are the forty-four grounds for knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jarāmaraṇe ñāṇaṃ, jarāmaraṇasamudaye ñāṇaṃ, jarāmaraṇanirodhe ñāṇaṃ, jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of old age and death, knowledge of the origin of old age and death, knowledge of the cessation of old age and death, and knowledge of the practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātiyā ñāṇaṃ, jātisamudaye ñāṇaṃ, jātinirodhe ñāṇaṃ, jātinirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhave ñāṇaṃ, bhavasamudaye ñāṇaṃ, bhavanirodhe ñāṇaṃ, bhavanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādāne ñāṇaṃ, upādānasamudaye ñāṇaṃ, upādānanirodhe ñāṇaṃ, upādānanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhāya ñāṇaṃ, taṇhāsamudaye ñāṇaṃ, taṇhānirodhe ñāṇaṃ, taṇhānirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāya ñāṇaṃ, vedanāsamudaye ñāṇaṃ, vedanānirodhe ñāṇaṃ, vedanānirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phasse ñāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatane ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpe ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇe ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāresu ñāṇaṃ, saṅkhārasamudaye ñāṇaṃ, saṅkhāranirodhe ñāṇaṃ, saṅkhāranirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge of choices, knowledge of the origin of choices, knowledge of the cessation of choices, and knowledge of the practice that leads to the cessation of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni vuccanti, bhikkhave, catucattārīsaṃ ñāṇavatthūni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the forty-four grounds for knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, jarāmaraṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is old age and death? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tesaṃ tesaṃ sattānaṃ tamhi tamhi sattanikāye jarā jīraṇatā khaṇḍiccaṃ pāliccaṃ valittacatā āyuno saṃhāni indriyānaṃ paripāko, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati jarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called old age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tesaṃ tesaṃ sattānaṃ tamhā tamhā sattanikāyā cuti cavanatā bhedo antaradhānaṃ maccu maraṇaṃ kālakiriyā khandhānaṃ bhedo kaḷevarassa nikkhepo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The passing away, perishing, disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, and laying to rest of the corpse of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati maraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti ayañca jarā, idañca maraṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is old age, and such is death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, jarāmaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātisamudayā jarāmaraṇasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is the origin of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When rebirth ceases, old age and death cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako evaṃ jarāmaraṇaṃ pajānāti, evaṃ jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ pajānāti, evaṃ jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ pajānāti, evaṃ jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti, idamassa dhamme ñāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple understands old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. This is their knowledge of the present phenomenon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā dhammena diṭṭhena viditena akālikena pattena pariyogāḷhena atītānāgatena yaṃ neti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With this present phenomenon that is seen, known, immediate, attained, and fathomed, they infer to the past and future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kho keci atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā jarāmaraṇaṃ abbhaññaṃsu, jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ abbhaññaṃsu, jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ abbhaññaṃsu, jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abbhaññaṃsu, sabbete evameva abbhaññaṃsu, seyyathāpāhaṃ etarahi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever ascetics and brahmins in the past directly knew old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation, all of them directly knew these things in exactly the same way that I do now. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi hi keci anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā jarāmaraṇaṃ abhijānissanti, jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ abhijānissanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ abhijānissanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhijānissanti, sabbete evameva abhijānissanti, seyyathāpāhaṃ etarahīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever ascetics and brahmins in the future will directly know old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation, all of them will directly know these things in exactly the same way that I do now. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa anvaye ñāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is their inferential knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa imāni dve ñāṇāni parisuddhāni honti pariyodātāni—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple has purified and cleansed these two knowledges—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhamme ñāṇañca anvaye ñāṇañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowledge of the present phenomena, and inferential knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako diṭṭhisampanno itipi, dassanasampanno itipi, āgato imaṃ saddhammaṃ itipi, passati imaṃ saddhammaṃ itipi, sekkhena ñāṇena samannāgato itipi, sekkhāya vijjāya samannāgato itipi, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno itipi, ariyo nibbedhikapañño itipi, amatadvāraṃ āhacca tiṭṭhati itipīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has done this, they’re called ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a trainee’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and ‘one who stands pushing open the door of the deathless’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, jāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is rebirth? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamo ca, bhikkhave, bhavo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is continued existence? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamañca, bhikkhave, upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is grasping? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamā ca, bhikkhave, taṇhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is craving? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamā ca, bhikkhave, vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is feeling? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamo ca, bhikkhave, phasso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is contact? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamañca, bhikkhave, saḷāyatanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the six sense fields? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamañca, bhikkhave, nāmarūpaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are name and form? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamañca, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is consciousness? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katame ca, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are choices? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayome, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are three kinds of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyasaṅkhāro, vacīsaṅkhāro, cittasaṅkhāroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāsamudayā saṅkhārasamudayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is the origin of choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjānirodhā saṅkhāranirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance ceases, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo saṅkhāranirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako evaṃ saṅkhāre pajānāti, evaṃ saṅkhārasamudayaṃ pajānāti, evaṃ saṅkhāranirodhaṃ pajānāti, evaṃ saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ pajānāti, idamassa dhamme ñāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple understands choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. This is their knowledge of the present phenomenon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So iminā dhammena diṭṭhena viditena akālikena pattena pariyogāḷhena atītānāgatena yaṃ neti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With this present phenomenon that is seen, known, immediate, attained, and fathomed, they infer to the past and future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye kho keci atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā saṅkhāre abbhaññaṃsu, saṅkhārasamudayaṃ abbhaññaṃsu, saṅkhāranirodhaṃ abbhaññaṃsu, saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abbhaññaṃsu, sabbete evameva abbhaññaṃsu, seyyathāpāhaṃ etarahi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever ascetics and brahmins in the past directly knew choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation, all of them directly knew these things in exactly the same way that I do now. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye hipi keci anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā saṅkhāre abhijānissanti, saṅkhārasamudayaṃ abhijānissanti, saṅkhāranirodhaṃ abhijānissanti, saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abhijānissanti, sabbete evameva abhijānissanti, seyyathāpāhaṃ etarahi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever ascetics and brahmins in the future will directly know choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation, all of them will directly know these things in exactly the same way that I do now. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa anvaye ñāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is their inferential knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa imāni dve ñāṇāni parisuddhāni honti pariyodātāni—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple has purified and cleansed these two knowledges—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhamme ñāṇañca anvaye ñāṇañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowledge of the present phenomena, and inferential knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako diṭṭhisampanno itipi, dassanasampanno itipi, āgato imaṃ saddhammaṃ itipi, passati imaṃ saddhammaṃ itipi, sekkhena ñāṇena samannāgato itipi, sekkhāya vijjāya samannāgato itipi, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno itipi, ariyo nibbedhikapañño itipi, amatadvāraṃ āhacca tiṭṭhati itipī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has done this, they’re called ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a trainee’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and ‘one who stands pushing open the door of the deathless’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
