<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.63-63. Puttamaṃsasutta  - 63. A Child’s Flesh </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.63. 63. Puttamaṃsasutta  - 63. A Child’s Flesh </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Mahāvagga  - 7. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“cattārome, bhikkhave, āhārā bhūtānaṃ vā sattānaṃ ṭhitiyā sambhavesīnaṃ vā anuggahāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four fuels. They maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those that are about to be born. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kabaḷīkāro āhāro oḷāriko vā sukhumo vā, phasso dutiyo, manosañcetanā tatiyā, viññāṇaṃ catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Solid food, whether coarse or fine; contact is the second, mental intention the third, and consciousness the fourth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro āhārā bhūtānaṃ vā sattānaṃ ṭhitiyā sambhavesīnaṃ vā anuggahāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four fuels that maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those that are about to be born. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, kabaḷīkāro āhāro daṭṭhabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how should you regard solid food? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dve jāyampatikā parittaṃ sambalaṃ ādāya kantāramaggaṃ paṭipajjeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a couple who were husband and wife set out to cross a desert, taking limited supplies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesamassa ekaputtako piyo manāpo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They had an only child, dear and beloved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tesaṃ, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ jāyampatikānaṃ kantāragatānaṃ yā parittā sambalamattā, sā parikkhayaṃ pariyādānaṃ gaccheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the couple were crossing the desert their limited quantity of supplies would run out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siyā ca nesaṃ kantārāvaseso anatiṇṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they’d still have the rest of the desert to cross. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tesaṃ, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ jāyampatikānaṃ evamassa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it would occur to that couple: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘amhākaṃ kho yā parittā sambalamattā sā parikkhīṇā pariyādiṇṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Our limited quantity of supplies has run out, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi cāyaṃ kantārāvaseso anittiṇṇo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and we still have the rest of the desert to cross. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūna mayaṃ imaṃ ekaputtakaṃ piyaṃ manāpaṃ vadhitvā vallūrañca soṇḍikañca karitvā puttamaṃsāni khādantā evaṃ taṃ kantārāvasesaṃ nitthareyyāma, mā sabbeva tayo vinassimhā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t we kill our only child, so dear and beloved, and prepare dried and spiced meat? Then we can make it across the desert by eating our child’s flesh. Let not all three perish.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te, bhikkhave, dve jāyampatikā taṃ ekaputtakaṃ piyaṃ manāpaṃ vadhitvā vallūrañca soṇḍikañca karitvā puttamaṃsāni khādantā evaṃ taṃ kantārāvasesaṃ nitthareyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that couple would kill their only child, so dear and beloved, and prepare dried and spiced meat. They’d make it across the desert by eating their child’s flesh. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te puttamaṃsāni ceva khādeyyuṃ, ure ca paṭipiseyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as they’d eat their child’s flesh, they’d beat their breasts and cry: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kahaṃ, ekaputtaka, kahaṃ, ekaputtakā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Where are you, our only child? Where are you, our only child?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api nu te davāya vā āhāraṃ āhāreyyuṃ, madāya vā āhāraṃ āhāreyyuṃ, maṇḍanāya vā āhāraṃ āhāreyyuṃ, vibhūsanāya vā āhāraṃ āhāreyyun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Would they eat that food for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nanu te, bhikkhave, yāvadeva kantārassa nittharaṇatthāya āhāraṃ āhāreyyun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wouldn’t they eat that food just so they could make it across the desert?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Evameva khvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, kabaḷīkāro āhāro daṭṭhabbo’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I say that this is how you should regard solid food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kabaḷīkāre, bhikkhave, āhāre pariññāte pañca kāmaguṇiko rāgo pariññāto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When solid food is completely understood, desire for the five kinds of sensual stimulation is completely understood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañca kāmaguṇike rāge pariññāte natthi taṃ saṃyojanaṃ yena saṃyojanena saṃyutto ariyasāvako puna imaṃ lokaṃ āgaccheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When desire for the five kinds of sensual stimulation is completely understood, a noble disciple is bound by no fetter that might return them again to this world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, phassāhāro daṭṭhabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how should you regard contact as fuel? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gāvī niccammā kuṭṭañce nissāya tiṭṭheyya. Ye kuṭṭanissitā pāṇā te naṃ khādeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a flayed cow. If she stands by a wall, the creatures on the wall bite her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rukkhañce nissāya tiṭṭheyya, ye rukkhanissitā pāṇā te naṃ khādeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stands under a tree, the creatures in the tree bite her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakañce nissāya tiṭṭheyya, ye udakanissitā pāṇā te naṃ khādeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stands in some water, the creatures in the water bite her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākāsañce nissāya tiṭṭheyya, ye ākāsanissitā pāṇā te naṃ khādeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stands in the open, the creatures in the open bite her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ yadeva hi sā, bhikkhave, gāvī niccammā nissāya tiṭṭheyya, ye tannissitā pāṇā te naṃ khādeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever that flayed cow stands, the creatures there would bite her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva khvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ‘phassāhāro daṭṭhabbo’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that this is how you should regard contact as fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phasse, bhikkhave, āhāre pariññāte tisso vedanā pariññātā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When contact as fuel is completely understood, the three feelings are completely understood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīsu vedanāsu pariññātāsu ariyasāvakassa natthi kiñci uttarikaraṇīyanti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the three feelings are completely understood, a noble disciple has nothing further to do, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, manosañcetanāhāro daṭṭhabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how should you regard mental intention as fuel? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, aṅgārakāsu sādhikaporisā puṇṇā aṅgārānaṃ vītaccikānaṃ vītadhūmānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man’s height, filled with glowing coals that neither flamed nor smoked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha puriso āgaccheyya jīvitukāmo amaritukāmo sukhakāmo dukkhappaṭikūlo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a person would come along who wants to live and doesn’t want to die, who wants to be happy and recoils from pain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ dve balavanto purisā nānābāhāsu gahetvā taṃ aṅgārakāsuṃ upakaḍḍheyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then two strong men would grab them by the arms and drag them towards the pit of glowing coals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, tassa purisassa ārakāvassa cetanā ārakā patthanā ārakā paṇidhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that person’s intention, aim, and wish would be to get far away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi, bhikkhave, tassa purisassa hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because that person would think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imañcāhaṃ aṅgārakāsuṃ papatissāmi, tatonidānaṃ maraṇaṃ vā nigacchāmi maraṇamattaṃ vā dukkhan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If I fall in that pit of glowing coals, that will result in my death or deadly pain.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva khvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ‘manosañcetanāhāro daṭṭhabbo’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that this is how you should regard mental intention as fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manosañcetanāya, bhikkhave, āhāre pariññāte tisso taṇhā pariññātā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When mental intention as fuel is completely understood, the three cravings are completely understood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīsu taṇhāsu pariññātāsu ariyasāvakassa natthi kiñci uttarikaraṇīyanti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the three cravings are completely understood, a noble disciple has nothing further to do, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, viññāṇāhāro daṭṭhabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how should you regard consciousness as fuel? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, coraṃ āgucāriṃ gahetvā rañño dasseyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to the king, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ te, deva, coro āgucārī, imassa yaṃ icchasi taṃ daṇḍaṃ paṇehī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Your Majesty, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ rājā evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The king would say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gacchatha, bho, imaṃ purisaṃ pubbaṇhasamayaṃ sattisatena hanathā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Go, my men, and strike this man in the morning with a hundred spears!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ pubbaṇhasamayaṃ sattisatena haneyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The king’s men did as they were told. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha rājā majjhanhikasamayaṃ evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then at midday the king would say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ambho, kathaṃ so puriso’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My men, how is that man?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tatheva, deva, jīvatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He’s still alive, Your Majesty.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ rājā evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The king would say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gacchatha, bho, taṃ purisaṃ majjhanhikasamayaṃ sattisatena hanathā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Go, my men, and strike this man in the middle of the day with a hundred spears!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ majjhanhikasamayaṃ sattisatena haneyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The king’s men did as they were told. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha rājā sāyanhasamayaṃ evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then late in the afternoon the king would say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ambho, kathaṃ so puriso’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My men, how is that man?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tatheva, deva, jīvatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He’s still alive, Your Majesty.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ rājā evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The king would say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gacchatha, bho, taṃ purisaṃ sāyanhasamayaṃ sattisatena hanathā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Go, my men, and strike this man in the late afternoon with a hundred spears!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ sāyanhasamayaṃ sattisatena haneyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The king’s men did as they were told. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api nu so puriso divasaṃ tīhi sattisatehi haññamāno tatonidānaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvediyethā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Would that man experience pain and distress from being struck with three hundred spears a day?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ekissāpi, bhante, sattiyā haññamāno tatonidānaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvediyetha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, that man would experience pain and distress from being struck with one spear, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ko pana vādo tīhi sattisatehi haññamāno”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">let alone three hundred spears!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva khvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, viññāṇāhāro daṭṭhabboti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I say that this is how you should regard consciousness as fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇe, bhikkhave, āhāre pariññāte nāmarūpaṃ pariññātaṃ hoti, nāmarūpe pariññāte ariyasāvakassa natthi kiñci uttarikaraṇīyanti vadāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness as fuel is completely understood, name and form is completely understood. When name and form are completely understood, a noble disciple has nothing further to do, I say.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
