<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.34-34. Dutiyañāṇavatthusutta  - 34. Grounds for Knowledge (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.34. 34. Dutiyañāṇavatthusutta  - 34. Grounds for Knowledge (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Kaḷārakhattiyavagga  - 4. Kaḷāra the Aristocrat </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattasattari vo, bhikkhave, ñāṇavatthūni desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach seventy-seven grounds for knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamāni, bhikkhave, sattasattari ñāṇavatthūni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what are the seventy-seven grounds for knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇanti ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The knowledge that rebirth is a condition for old age and death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asati jātiyā natthi jarāmaraṇanti ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the knowledge that when rebirth doesn’t exist, there is no old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atītampi addhānaṃ jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇanti ñāṇaṃ, asati jātiyā natthi jarāmaraṇanti ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Also regarding the past: the knowledge that rebirth is a condition for old age and death, and the knowledge that when rebirth doesn’t exist, there is no old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgatampi addhānaṃ jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇanti ñāṇaṃ, asati jātiyā natthi jarāmaraṇanti ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Also regarding the future: the knowledge that rebirth is a condition for old age and death, and the knowledge that when rebirth doesn’t exist, there is no old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampissa taṃ dhammaṭṭhitiñāṇaṃ tampi khayadhammaṃ vayadhammaṃ virāgadhammaṃ nirodhadhammanti ñāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And also their knowledge that even this knowledge of the stability of natural principles is liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavapaccayā jātīti ñāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The knowledge that continued existence is a condition for rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānapaccayā bhavoti ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhāpaccayā upādānanti ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāpaccayā taṇhāti ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassapaccayā vedanāti ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanapaccayā phassoti ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatananti ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpanti ñāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇanti ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārāti ñāṇaṃ, asati avijjāya natthi saṅkhārāti ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The knowledge that ignorance is a condition for choices, and the knowledge that when ignorance doesn’t exist, there are no choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atītampi addhānaṃ avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārāti ñāṇaṃ, asati avijjāya natthi saṅkhārāti ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Also regarding the past: the knowledge that ignorance is a condition for choices, and the knowledge that when ignorance doesn’t exist, there are no choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāgatampi addhānaṃ avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārāti ñāṇaṃ, asati avijjāya natthi saṅkhārāti ñāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Also regarding the future: the knowledge that ignorance is a condition for choices, and the knowledge that when ignorance doesn’t exist, there are no choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yampissa taṃ dhammaṭṭhitiñāṇaṃ tampi khayadhammaṃ vayadhammaṃ virāgadhammaṃ nirodhadhammanti ñāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And also their knowledge that even this knowledge of the stability of natural principles is liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni vuccanti, bhikkhave, sattasattari ñāṇavatthūnī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are called the seventy-seven grounds for knowledge.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
