<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.54-54. Dutiyasaṃyojanasutta  - 54. Fetters (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.54. 54. Dutiyasaṃyojanasutta  - 54. Fetters (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Dukkhavagga  - 6. Suffering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, telañca paṭicca vaṭṭiñca paṭicca telappadīpo jhāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra puriso kālena kālaṃ telaṃ āsiñceyya vaṭṭiṃ upasaṃhareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And from time to time someone would pour oil in and adjust the wick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, telappadīpo tadāhāro tadupādāno ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ jaleyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fueled and sustained by that, the oil lamp would burn for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, saṃyojaniyesu dhammesu assādānupassino viharato taṇhā pavaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a condition for grasping. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, telañca paṭicca vaṭṭiñca paṭicca telappadīpo jhāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra puriso na kālena kālaṃ telaṃ āsiñceyya na vaṭṭiṃ upasaṃhareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And no-one would pour oil in and adjust the wick from time to time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, telappadīpo purimassa ca upādānassa pariyādānā aññassa ca anupahārā anāhāro nibbāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the original fuel is used up and no more is added, the oil lamp would be extinguished due to lack of fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, saṃyojaniyesu dhammesu ādīnavānupassino viharato taṇhā nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving ceases, grasping ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
