<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.29-29. Samaṇabrāhmaṇasutta  - 29. Ascetics and Brahmins </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.29. 29. Samaṇabrāhmaṇasutta  - 29. Ascetics and Brahmins </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Dasabalavagga  - 3. The Ten Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tatra kho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā jarāmaraṇaṃ na parijānanti, jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ na parijānanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ na parijānanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ na parijānanti, jātiṃ na parijānanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are ascetics and brahmins who don’t completely understand old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. They don’t completely understand rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t completely understand choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārasamudayaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">their origin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">their cessation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ na parijānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the practice that leads to their cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na mete, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu vā samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu vā brāhmaṇasammatā. Na ca panete āyasmanto sāmaññatthaṃ vā brahmaññatthaṃ vā diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā jarāmaraṇaṃ parijānanti, jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ parijānanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ parijānanti, jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ parijānanti, jātiṃ parijānanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are ascetics and brahmins who completely understand old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. They completely understand rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre parijānanti, saṅkhārasamudayaṃ parijānanti, saṅkhāranirodhaṃ parijānanti, saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ parijānanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te kho me, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu ceva samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu ca brāhmaṇasammatā. Te ca panāyasmanto sāmaññatthañca brahmaññatthañca diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
