<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.65-65. Nagarasutta  - 65. The City </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.65. 65. Nagarasutta  - 65. The City </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Mahāvagga  - 7. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbe me, bhikkhave, sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kicchā vatāyaṃ loko āpanno jāyati ca jīyati ca mīyati ca cavati ca upapajjati ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Alas, this world has fallen into trouble. It’s born, grows old, dies, passes away, and is reborn, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ca panimassa dukkhassa nissaraṇaṃ nappajānāti jarāmaraṇassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">yet it doesn’t understand how to escape from this suffering, from old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kudāssu nāma imassa dukkhassa nissaraṇaṃ paññāyissati jarāmaraṇassā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Oh, when will an escape be found from this suffering, from old age and death?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kimhi nu kho sati jarāmaraṇaṃ hoti, kiṃpaccayā jarāmaraṇan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When what exists is there old age and death? What is a condition for old age and death?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasikārā ahu paññāya abhisamayo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, through proper attention, I comprehended with wisdom: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘jātiyā kho sati jarāmaraṇaṃ hoti, jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When rebirth exists there’s old age and death. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kimhi nu kho sati jāti hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When what exists is there rebirth? … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhā hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phasso hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kiṃpaccayā nāmarūpan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is a condition for name and form?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasikārā ahu paññāya abhisamayo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, through proper attention, I comprehended with wisdom: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘viññāṇe kho sati nāmarūpaṃ hoti, viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When consciousness exists there are name and form. Consciousness is a condition for name and form.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kimhi nu kho sati viññāṇaṃ hoti, kiṃpaccayā viññāṇan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When what exists is there consciousness? What is a condition for consciousness?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasikārā ahu paññāya abhisamayo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, through proper attention, I comprehended with wisdom: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāmarūpe kho sati viññāṇaṃ hoti, nāmarūpapaccayā viññāṇan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When name and form exist there’s consciousness. Name and form are a condition for consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccudāvattati kho idaṃ viññāṇaṃ nāmarūpamhā na paraṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This consciousness turns back from name and form, and doesn’t go beyond that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā jāyetha vā jīyetha vā mīyetha vā cavetha vā upapajjetha vā, yadidaṃ nāmarūpapaccayā viññāṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the extent to which one may be reborn, grow old, die, pass away, or reappear. That is: name and form are conditions for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is a condition for name and form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The six sense fields are conditions for contact. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Samudayo, samudayo’ti kho me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Origination, origination.’ Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kimhi nu kho asati, jarāmaraṇaṃ na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When what doesn’t exist is there no old age and death? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kissa nirodhā jarāmaraṇanirodho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When what ceases do old age and death cease?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasikārā ahu paññāya abhisamayo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, through proper attention, I comprehended with wisdom: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘jātiyā kho asati, jarāmaraṇaṃ na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When rebirth doesn’t exist there is no old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇanirodho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When rebirth ceases old age and death cease.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kimhi nu kho asati jāti na hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When what doesn’t exist is there no rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavo na hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ na hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhā na hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā na hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phasso na hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ na hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kissa nirodhā nāmarūpanirodho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When what ceases do name and form cease?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasikārā ahu paññāya abhisamayo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, through proper attention, I comprehended with wisdom: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘viññāṇe kho asati, nāmarūpaṃ na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When consciousness doesn’t exist name and form don’t come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇanirodhā nāmarūpanirodho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness ceases name and form cease.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kimhi nu kho asati viññāṇaṃ na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When what doesn’t exist is there no consciousness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kissa nirodhā viññāṇanirodho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When what ceases does consciousness cease?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasikārā ahu paññāya abhisamayo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, through proper attention, I comprehended with wisdom: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāmarūpe kho asati, viññāṇaṃ na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When name and form don’t exist, there is no consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpanirodhā viññāṇanirodho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form cease, consciousness ceases.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhigato kho myāyaṃ maggo bodhāya yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">I have discovered the path to awakening. That is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpanirodhā viññāṇanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form cease, consciousness ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇanirodhā nāmarūpanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpanirodhā saḷāyatananirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatananirodhā phassanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Nirodho, nirodho’ti kho me, bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuṃ udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Cessation, cessation.’ Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso araññe pavane caramāno passeyya purāṇaṃ maggaṃ purāṇañjasaṃ pubbakehi manussehi anuyātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a person was walking through a forest. They’d see an ancient path, an ancient route traveled by humans in the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tamanugaccheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Following it along, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamanugacchanto passeyya purāṇaṃ nagaraṃ purāṇaṃ rājadhāniṃ pubbakehi manussehi ajjhāvuṭṭhaṃ ārāmasampannaṃ vanasampannaṃ pokkharaṇīsampannaṃ uddhāpavantaṃ ramaṇīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’d see an ancient city, an ancient capital, inhabited by humans in the past. It was lovely, complete with parks, groves, lotus ponds, and embankments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so, bhikkhave, puriso rañño vā rājamahāmattassa vā āroceyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that person would inform a king or their minister: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yagghe, bhante, jāneyyāsi—ahaṃ addasaṃ araññe pavane caramāno purāṇaṃ maggaṃ purāṇañjasaṃ pubbakehi manussehi anuyātaṃ tamanugacchiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please sir, you should know this. While walking through a forest I saw an ancient path, an ancient route traveled by humans in the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamanugacchanto addasaṃ purāṇaṃ nagaraṃ purāṇaṃ rājadhāniṃ pubbakehi manussehi ajjhāvuṭṭhaṃ ārāmasampannaṃ vanasampannaṃ pokkharaṇīsampannaṃ uddhāpavantaṃ ramaṇīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Following it along I saw an ancient city, an ancient capital, inhabited by humans in the past. It was lovely, complete with parks, groves, lotus ponds, and embankments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ, bhante, nagaraṃ māpehī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, you should rebuild that city!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so, bhikkhave, rājā vā rājamahāmatto vā taṃ nagaraṃ māpeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that king or their minister would have that city rebuilt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadassa nagaraṃ aparena samayena iddhañceva phītañca bāhujaññaṃ ākiṇṇamanussaṃ vuddhivepullappattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And after some time that city was successful and prosperous and full of people, attained to growth and expansion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva khvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, addasaṃ purāṇaṃ maggaṃ purāṇañjasaṃ pubbakehi sammāsambuddhehi anuyātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I saw an ancient path, an ancient route traveled by fully awakened Buddhas in the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca so, bhikkhave, purāṇamaggo purāṇañjaso pubbakehi sammāsambuddhehi anuyāto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is that ancient path, the ancient road traveled by fully awakened Buddhas in the past? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho so, bhikkhave, purāṇamaggo purāṇañjaso pubbakehi sammāsambuddhehi anuyāto, tamanugacchiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is that ancient path, the ancient road traveled by fully awakened Buddhas in the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamanugacchanto jarāmaraṇaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Following it along, I directly knew old age and death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarāmaraṇasamudayaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their origin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarāmaraṇanirodhaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their cessation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the practice that leads to their cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamanugacchiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamanugacchanto jātiṃ abbhaññāsiṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Following it along, I directly knew rebirth … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">continued existence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">grasping … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">craving … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">contact … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the six sense fields … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">name and form … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamanugacchiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tamanugacchanto saṅkhāre abbhaññāsiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Following it along, I directly knew choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārasamudayaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their origin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their cessation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the practice that leads to their cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadabhiññāya ācikkhiṃ bhikkhūnaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ upāsakānaṃ upāsikānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having directly known this, I told the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayidaṃ, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṃ iddhañceva phītañca vitthārikaṃ bāhujaññaṃ puthubhūtaṃ yāva devamanussehi suppakāsitan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s how this spiritual life has become successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
