<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.23-23. Upanisasutta  - 23. Vital Conditions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.23. 23. Upanisasutta  - 23. Vital Conditions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Dasabalavagga  - 3. The Ten Powers </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jānato ahaṃ, bhikkhave, passato āsavānaṃ khayaṃ vadāmi, no ajānato no apassato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I say that the ending of defilements is for one who knows and sees, not for one who does not know or see. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñca, bhikkhave, jānato kiṃ passato āsavānaṃ khayo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one who knows and sees what? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti rūpaṃ iti rūpassa samudayo iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti vedanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such are choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti viññāṇaṃ iti viññāṇassa samudayo iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, jānato evaṃ passato āsavānaṃ khayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ending of the defilements is for one who knows and sees this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampissa taṃ, bhikkhave, khayasmiṃ khayeñāṇaṃ, tampi saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that this knowledge of ending has a vital condition, it doesn’t lack a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, khayeñāṇassa upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Vimuttī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Freedom.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that freedom has a vital condition, it doesn’t lack a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, vimuttiyā upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Virāgo’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Dispassion.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Virāgampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that dispassion has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, virāgassa upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Nibbidā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Disillusionment.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbidampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that disillusionment has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, nibbidāya upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yathābhūtañāṇadassanan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Truly knowing and seeing.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathābhūtañāṇadassanampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that truly knowing and seeing has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, yathābhūtañāṇadassanassa upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Samādhī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Immersion.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that immersion has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, samādhissa upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sukhan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that bliss has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, sukhassa upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Passaddhī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Tranquility.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passaddhimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that tranquility has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, passaddhiyā upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Pītī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Rapture.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pītimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that rapture has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, pītiyā upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Pāmojjan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Joy.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāmojjampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that joy has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, pāmojjassa upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saddhā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Faith.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that faith has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, saddhāya upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Dukkhan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Suffering.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that suffering has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, dukkhassa upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Jātī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Rebirth.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that rebirth has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, jātiyā upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Bhavo’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Continued existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that continued existence has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, bhavassa upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Upādānan’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Grasping.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upādānampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that grasping has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, upādānassa upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṇhā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Craving.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that craving has a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, taṇhāya upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Vedanā’tissa vacanīyaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Feeling.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘phasso’tissa vacanīyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Contact.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saḷāyatanan’tissa vacanīyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘The six sense fields.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāmarūpan’tissa vacanīyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Name and form.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘viññāṇan’tissa vacanīyaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Consciousness.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṅkhārā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Choices.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhārepāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanise vadāmi, no anupanise. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that choices have a vital condition, they don’t lack a vital condition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kā ca, bhikkhave, saṅkhārānaṃ upanisā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the vital condition for choices? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Avijjā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should say: ‘Ignorance.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, avijjūpanisā saṅkhārā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So ignorance is a vital condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārūpanisaṃ viññāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a vital condition for consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇūpanisaṃ nāmarūpaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Consciousness is a vital condition for name and form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpūpanisaṃ saḷāyatanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Name and form are vital conditions for the six sense fields. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanūpaniso phasso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The six sense fields are vital conditions for contact. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassūpanisā vedanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contact is a vital condition for feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanūpanisā taṇhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling is a vital condition for craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhūpanisaṃ upādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a vital condition for grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānūpaniso bhavo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Grasping is a vital condition for continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavūpanisā jāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Continued existence is a vital condition for rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātūpanisaṃ dukkhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is a vital condition for suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhūpanisā saddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suffering is a vital condition for faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhūpanisaṃ pāmojjaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Faith is a vital condition for joy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāmojjūpanisā pīti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Joy is a vital condition for rapture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītūpanisā passaddhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rapture is a vital condition for tranquility. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passaddhūpanisaṃ sukhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tranquility is a vital condition for bliss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhūpaniso samādhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bliss is a vital condition for immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhūpanisaṃ yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Immersion is a vital condition for truly knowing and seeing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathābhūtañāṇadassanūpanisā nibbidā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Truly knowing and seeing is a vital condition for disillusionment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbidūpaniso virāgo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Disillusionment is a vital condition for dispassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">virāgūpanisā vimutti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Dispassion is a vital condition for freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttūpanisaṃ khayeñāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Freedom is a vital condition for the knowledge of ending. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uparipabbate thullaphusitake deve vassante taṃ udakaṃ yathāninnaṃ pavattamānaṃ pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūreti. Pabbatakandarapadarasākhāparipūrā kusobbhe paripūrenti. Kusobbhā paripūrā mahāsobbhe paripūrenti. Mahāsobbhā paripūrā kunnadiyo paripūrenti. Kunnadiyo paripūrā mahānadiyo paripūrenti. Mahānadiyo paripūrā mahāsamuddaṃ paripūrenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like when it rains heavily on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, avijjūpanisā saṅkhārā, saṅkhārūpanisaṃ viññāṇaṃ, viññāṇūpanisaṃ nāmarūpaṃ, nāmarūpūpanisaṃ saḷāyatanaṃ, saḷāyatanūpaniso phasso, phassūpanisā vedanā, vedanūpanisā taṇhā, taṇhūpanisaṃ upādānaṃ, upādānūpaniso bhavo, bhavūpanisā jāti, jātūpanisaṃ dukkhaṃ, dukkhūpanisā saddhā, saddhūpanisaṃ pāmojjaṃ, pāmojjūpanisā pīti, pītūpanisā passaddhi, passaddhūpanisaṃ sukhaṃ, sukhūpaniso samādhi, samādhūpanisaṃ yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ, yathābhūtañāṇadassanūpanisā nibbidā, nibbidūpaniso virāgo, virāgūpanisā vimutti, vimuttūpanisaṃ khayeñāṇan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, ignorance is a vital condition for choices. … Freedom is a vital condition for the knowledge of ending.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
