<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.15-15. Kaccānagottasutta  - 15. Kaccānagotta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.15. 15. Kaccānagottasutta  - 15. Kaccānagotta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Āhāravagga  - 2. Fuel </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā kaccānagotto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā kaccānagotto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Kaccānagotta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘sammādiṭṭhi sammādiṭṭhī’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘right view’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, sammādiṭṭhi hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is right view defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvayanissito khvāyaṃ, kaccāna, loko yebhuyyena—atthitañceva natthitañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kaccāna, this world mostly relies on the dual notions of existence and non-existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokasamudayaṃ kho, kaccāna, yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passato yā loke natthitā sā na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when you truly see the origin of the world with right understanding, you won’t have the notion of non-existence regarding the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokanirodhaṃ kho, kaccāna, yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passato yā loke atthitā sā na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when you truly see the cessation of the world with right understanding, you won’t have the notion of existence regarding the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upayupādānābhinivesavinibandho khvāyaṃ, kaccāna, loko yebhuyyena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The world is for the most part shackled to attraction, grasping, and insisting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañcāyaṃ upayupādānaṃ cetaso adhiṭṭhānaṃ abhinivesānusayaṃ na upeti na upādiyati nādhiṭṭhāti: ‘attā me’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if—when it comes to this attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendency—you don’t get attracted, grasp, and commit to the notion ‘my self’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Dukkhameva uppajjamānaṃ uppajjati, dukkhaṃ nirujjhamānaṃ nirujjhatī’ti na kaṅkhati na vicikicchati aparapaccayā ñāṇamevassa ettha hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll have no doubt or uncertainty that what arises is just suffering arising, and what ceases is just suffering ceasing. Your knowledge about this is independent of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, kaccāna, sammādiṭṭhi hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how right view is defined. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sabbamatthī’ti kho, kaccāna, ayameko anto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘All exists’: this is one extreme. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sabbaṃ natthī’ti ayaṃ dutiyo anto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘All doesn’t exist’: this is the second extreme. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete te, kaccāna, ubho ante anupagamma majjhena tathāgato dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Ignorance is a condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a condition for consciousness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
