<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.60-60. Nidānasutta  - 60. Sources </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.60. 60. Nidānasutta  - 60. Sources </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Dukkhavagga  - 6. Suffering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kurūsu viharati kammāsadhammaṃ nāma kurūnaṃ nigamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir! It’s amazing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva gambhīro cāyaṃ, bhante, paṭiccasamuppādo gambhīrāvabhāso ca, atha ca pana me uttānakuttānako viya khāyatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in that this dependent origination is deep and appears deep, yet to me it seems as plain as can be.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā hevaṃ, ānanda, mā hevaṃ, ānanda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Not so, Ānanda! Not so, Ānanda! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gambhīro cāyaṃ, ānanda, paṭiccasamuppādo gambhīrāvabhāso ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This dependent origination is deep and appears deep. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etassa, ānanda, dhammassa ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamayaṃ pajā tantākulakajātā kulagaṇṭhikajātā muñjapabbajabhūtā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ saṃsāraṃ nātivattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is because of not understanding and not penetrating this teaching that this population has become tangled like string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds, and it doesn’t escape the places of loss, the bad places, the underworld, transmigration. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upādāniyesu, ānanda, dhammesu assādānupassino viharato taṇhā pavaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a condition for grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānapaccayā bhavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Grasping is a condition for continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavapaccayā jāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, mahārukkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a great tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa yāni ceva mūlāni adhogamāni, yāni ca tiriyaṅgamāni, sabbāni tāni uddhaṃ ojaṃ abhiharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And its roots going downwards and across all draw the sap upwards. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, ānanda, mahārukkho tadāhāro tadupādāno ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fueled and sustained by that, the great tree would stand for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, ānanda, upādāniyesu dhammesu assādānupassino viharato taṇhā pavaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a condition for grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānapaccayā bhavo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Grasping is a condition for continued existence. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upādāniyesu, ānanda, dhammesu ādīnavānupassino viharato taṇhā nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving ceases, grasping ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, mahārukkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a great tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha puriso āgaccheyya kuddālapiṭakaṃ ādāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a person comes along with a spade and basket. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ rukkhaṃ mūle chindeyya, mūle chetvā palikhaṇeyya, palikhaṇitvā mūlāni uddhareyya antamaso usīranāḷimattānipi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’d cut the tree down at the roots, dig them up, and pull them out, down to the fibers and stems. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṃ rukkhaṃ khaṇḍākhaṇḍikaṃ chindeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they’d split the tree apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into little bits. They’d dry the bits in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to ashes. Then they’d winnow the ashes in a strong wind, or float them away down a swift stream. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khaṇḍākhaṇḍikaṃ chinditvā phāleyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phāletvā sakalikaṃ sakalikaṃ kareyya, sakalikaṃ sakalikaṃ karitvā vātātape visoseyya, vātātape visosetvā agginā ḍaheyya, agginā ḍahetvā masiṃ kareyya, masiṃ karitvā mahāvāte vā ophuṇeyya, nadiyā vā sīghasotāya pavāheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, ānanda, mahārukkho ucchinnamūlo assa tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the great tree is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, ānanda, upādāniyesu dhammesu ādīnavānupassino viharato taṇhā nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving ceases, grasping ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavanirodhā jātinirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇaṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā nirujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhavaggo chaṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parivīmaṃsanupādānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve ca saṃyojanāni ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahārukkhena dve vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taruṇena ca sattamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpañca viññāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nidānena ca te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
