<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.35-35. Avijjāpaccayasutta  - 35. Ignorance is a Condition </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.35. 35. Avijjāpaccayasutta  - 35. Ignorance is a Condition </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Kaḷārakhattiyavagga  - 4. Kaḷāra the Aristocrat </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Avijjāpaccayā, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ignorance is a condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a condition for consciousness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘katamaṃ nu kho, bhante, jarāmaraṇaṃ, kassa ca panidaṃ jarāmaraṇan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What are old age and death, sir, and who do they belong to?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘No kallo pañho’ti bhagavā avoca, ‘katamaṃ jarāmaraṇaṃ, kassa ca panidaṃ jarāmaraṇan’ti iti vā, bhikkhu, yo vadeyya, ‘aññaṃ jarāmaraṇaṃ aññassa ca panidaṃ jarāmaraṇan’ti, iti vā, bhikkhu, yo vadeyya, ubhayametaṃ ekatthaṃ byañjanameva nānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s not a fitting question,” said the Buddha. “You might say, ‘What are old age and death, and who do they belong to?’ Or you might say, ‘Old age and death are one thing, who they belong to is another.’ But both of these mean the same thing, only the phrasing differs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīranti vā, bhikkhu, diṭṭhiyā sati brahmacariyavāso na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicant, if you have the view that the soul and the body are the same thing, there is no living of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīranti vā, bhikkhu, diṭṭhiyā sati brahmacariyavāso na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have the view that the soul and the body are different things, there is no living of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete te, bhikkhu, ubho ante anupagamma majjhena tathāgato dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Rebirth is a condition for old age and death.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamā nu kho, bhante, jāti, kassa ca panāyaṃ jātī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is rebirth, sir, and who does it belong to?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No kallo pañho”ti bhagavā avoca, “‘katamā jāti, kassa ca panāyaṃ jātī’ti iti vā, bhikkhu, yo vadeyya, ‘aññā jāti aññassa ca panāyaṃ jātī’ti iti vā, bhikkhu, yo vadeyya, ubhayametaṃ ekatthaṃ byañjanameva nānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s not a fitting question,” said the Buddha. “You might say, ‘What is rebirth, and who does it belong to?’ Or you might say, ‘Rebirth is one thing, who it belongs to is another.’ But both of these mean the same thing, only the phrasing differs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīranti vā, bhikkhu, diṭṭhiyā sati brahmacariyavāso na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicant, if you have the view that the soul and the body are the same thing, there is no living of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīranti vā, bhikkhu, diṭṭhiyā sati brahmacariyavāso na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have the view that the soul and the body are different things, there is no living of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete te, bhikkhu, ubho ante anupagamma majjhena tathāgato dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhavapaccayā jātī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Continued existence is a condition for rebirth.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo nu kho, bhante, bhavo, kassa ca panāyaṃ bhavo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is continued existence, sir, and who is it for?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No kallo pañho”ti bhagavā avoca, “‘katamo bhavo, kassa ca panāyaṃ bhavo’ti iti vā, bhikkhu, yo vadeyya, ‘añño bhavo aññassa ca panāyaṃ bhavo’ti iti vā, bhikkhu, yo vadeyya, ubhayametaṃ ekatthaṃ byañjanameva nānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s not a fitting question,” said the Buddha. “You might say, ‘What is continued existence, and who does it belong to?’ Or you might say, ‘Continued existence is one thing, who it belongs to is another.’ But both of these mean the same thing, only the phrasing differs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīranti vā, bhikkhu, diṭṭhiyā sati brahmacariyavāso na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicant, if you have the view that the soul and the body are identical, there is no living of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīranti vā, bhikkhu, diṭṭhiyā sati brahmacariyavāso na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have the view that the soul and the body are different things, there is no living of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete te, bhikkhu, ubho ante anupagamma majjhena tathāgato dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘upādānapaccayā bhavo’ti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Grasping is a condition for continued existence.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘taṇhāpaccayā upādānanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Craving is a condition for grasping.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāpaccayā taṇhāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Feeling is a condition for craving.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phassapaccayā vedanāti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Contact is a condition for feeling.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saḷāyatanapaccayā phassoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The six sense fields are conditions for contact.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatananti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Consciousness is a condition for name and form.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Choices are a condition for consciousness.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katame nu kho, bhante, saṅkhārā, kassa ca panime saṅkhārā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What are choices, sir, and who do they belong to?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No kallo pañho”ti bhagavā avoca, “‘katame saṅkhārā kassa ca panime saṅkhārā’ti iti vā, bhikkhu, yo vadeyya, ‘aññe saṅkhārā aññassa ca panime saṅkhārā’ti iti vā, bhikkhu, yo vadeyya, ubhayametaṃ ekatthaṃ byañjanameva nānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s not a fitting question,” said the Buddha. “You might say, ‘What are choices, and who do they belong to?’ Or you might say, ‘Choices are one thing, who they belong to is another.’ But both of these mean the same thing, only the phrasing differs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīranti vā, bhikkhu, diṭṭhiyā sati brahmacariyavāso na hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicant, if you have the view that the soul and the body are the same thing, there is no living of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīranti vā, bhikkhu, diṭṭhiyā sati brahmacariyavāso na hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you have the view that the soul and the body are different things, there is no living of the spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete te, bhikkhu, ubho ante anupagamma majjhena tathāgato dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Ignorance is a condition for choices.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Avijjāya tveva, bhikkhu, asesavirāganirodhā yānissa tāni visūkāyikāni visevitāni vipphanditāni kānici kānici. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, then any tricks, dodges, and evasions are given up: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Katamaṃ jarāmaraṇaṃ, kassa ca panidaṃ jarāmaraṇaṃ’ iti vā, ‘aññaṃ jarāmaraṇaṃ, aññassa ca panidaṃ jarāmaraṇaṃ’ iti vā, ‘taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīraṃ’ iti vā, ‘aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīraṃ’ iti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What are old age and death, and who do they belong to?’ or ‘old age and death are one thing, who they belong to is another’, or ‘the soul and the body are the same thing’, or ‘the soul and the body are different things.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbānissa tāni pahīnāni bhavanti ucchinnamūlāni tālāvatthukatāni anabhāvaṅkatāni āyatiṃ anuppādadhammāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are all cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva, bhikkhu, asesavirāganirodhā yānissa tāni visūkāyikāni visevitāni vipphanditāni kānici kānici. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, then any tricks, dodges, and evasions are given up: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Katamā jāti, kassa ca panāyaṃ jāti’ iti vā, ‘aññā jāti, aññassa ca panāyaṃ jāti’ iti vā, ‘taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīraṃ’ iti vā, ‘aññaṃ jīvaṃ aññaṃ sarīraṃ’ iti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What is rebirth, and who does it belong to?’ or ‘rebirth is one thing, who it belongs to is another’, or ‘the soul and the body are the same thing’, or ‘the soul and the body are different things.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbānissa tāni pahīnāni bhavanti ucchinnamūlāni tālāvatthukatāni anabhāvaṅkatāni āyatiṃ anuppādadhammāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are all cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva, bhikkhu, asesavirāganirodhā yānissa tāni visūkāyikāni visevitāni vipphanditāni kānici kānici. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, then any tricks, dodges, and evasions are given up: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo bhavo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What is continued existence …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ upādānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What is grasping …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamā taṇhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What is craving …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamā vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What is feeling …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamo phasso … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What is contact …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ saḷāyatanaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What are the six sense fields …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nāmarūpaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What are name and form …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ viññāṇaṃ … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What is consciousness …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva, bhikkhu, asesavirāganirodhā yānissa tāni visūkāyikāni visevitāni vipphanditāni kānici kānici. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, then any tricks, dodges, and evasions are given up: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Katame saṅkhārā, kassa ca panime saṅkhārā’ iti vā, ‘aññe saṅkhārā, aññassa ca panime saṅkhārā’ iti vā, ‘taṃ jīvaṃ taṃ sarīraṃ’ iti vā, ‘aññaṃ jīvaṃ, aññaṃ sarīraṃ’ iti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What are choices, and who do they belong to?’ or ‘choices are one thing, who they belong to is another’, or ‘the soul and the body are the same thing’, or ‘the soul and the body are different things.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbānissa tāni pahīnāni bhavanti ucchinnamūlāni tālāvatthukatāni anabhāvaṅkatāni āyatiṃ anuppādadhammānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are all cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
