<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.52-52. Upādānasutta  - 52. Grasping </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.52. 52. Upādānasutta  - 52. Grasping </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Dukkhavagga  - 6. Suffering </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Upādāniyesu, bhikkhave, dhammesu assādānupassino viharato taṇhā pavaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a condition for grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānapaccayā bhavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Grasping is a condition for continued existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavapaccayā jāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dasannaṃ vā kaṭṭhavāhānaṃ vīsāya vā kaṭṭhavāhānaṃ tiṃsāya vā kaṭṭhavāhānaṃ cattārīsāya vā kaṭṭhavāhānaṃ mahāaggikkhandho jaleyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a bonfire was burning with ten, twenty, thirty, or forty loads of wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra puriso kālena kālaṃ sukkhāni ceva tiṇāni pakkhipeyya, sukkhāni ca gomayāni pakkhipeyya, sukkhāni ca kaṭṭhāni pakkhipeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And from time to time someone would toss in dry grass, cow dung, or wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, mahāaggikkhandho tadāhāro tadupādāno ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ jaleyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fueled and sustained by that, the bonfire would burn for a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, upādāniyesu dhammesu assādānupassino viharato taṇhā pavaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a condition for grasping. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upādāniyesu, bhikkhave, dhammesu ādīnavānupassino viharato taṇhā nirujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving ceases, grasping ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavanirodhā jātinirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇaṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā nirujjhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dasannaṃ vā kaṭṭhavāhānaṃ vīsāya vā tiṃsāya vā cattārīsāya vā kaṭṭhavāhānaṃ mahāaggikkhandho jaleyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a bonfire was burning with ten, twenty, thirty, or forty loads of wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra puriso na kālena kālaṃ sukkhāni ceva tiṇāni pakkhipeyya, na sukkhāni ca gomayāni pakkhipeyya, na sukkhāni ca kaṭṭhāni pakkhipeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And no-one would toss in dry grass, cow dung, or wood from time to time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, mahāaggikkhandho purimassa ca upādānassa pariyādānā aññassa ca anupahārā anāhāro nibbāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the original fuel is used up and no more is added, the bonfire would be extinguished due to lack of fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, upādāniyesu dhammesu ādīnavānupassino viharato taṇhā nirujjhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When craving ceases, grasping ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
