<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>12.48-48. Lokāyatikasutta  - 48. A Cosmologist </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">12.48. 48. Lokāyatikasutta  - 48. A Cosmologist </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Gahapativagga  - 5. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho lokāyatiko brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a brahmin cosmologist went up to the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekamantaṃ nisinno kho lokāyatiko brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seated to one side he said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho, bho gotama, sabbamatthī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, does all exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Sabbamatthī’ti kho, brāhmaṇa, jeṭṭhametaṃ lokāyataṃ”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘All exists’: this is the oldest cosmology, brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana, bho gotama, sabbaṃ natthī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then does all not exist?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Sabbaṃ natthī’ti kho, brāhmaṇa, dutiyametaṃ lokāyataṃ”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘All doesn’t exist’: this is the second cosmology. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu kho, bho gotama, sabbamekattan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, is all a unity?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Sabbamekattan’ti kho, brāhmaṇa, tatiyametaṃ lokāyataṃ”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘All is a unity’: this is the third cosmology. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana, bho gotama, sabbaṃ puthuttan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then is all a plurality?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Sabbaṃ puthuttan’ti kho, brāhmaṇa, catutthametaṃ lokāyataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘All is a plurality’: this is the fourth cosmology. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete te, brāhmaṇa, ubho ante anupagamma majjhena tathāgato dhammaṃ deseti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Ignorance is a condition for choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Choices are a condition for consciousness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjāya tveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, lokāyatiko brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the brahmin cosmologist said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
