<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>13.02-2. Pokkharaṇīsutta  - 2. A Lotus Pond </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">13.02. 2. Pokkharaṇīsutta  - 2. A Lotus Pond </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Abhisamayavagga  - 1. Comprehension </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, pokkharaṇī paññāsayojanāni āyāmena paññāsayojanāni vitthārena paññāsayojanāni ubbedhena, puṇṇā udakassa samatittikā kākapeyyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose there was a lotus pond that was fifty leagues long, fifty leagues wide, and fifty leagues deep, full to the brim so a crow could drink from it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato puriso kusaggena udakaṃ uddhareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a person would pick up some water on the tip of a blade of grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ, yaṃ vā kusaggena udakaṃ ubbhataṃ yaṃ vā pokkharaṇiyā udakan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is more: the water on the tip of the blade of grass, or the water in the lotus pond?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ, yadidaṃ pokkharaṇiyā udakaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the water in the lotus pond is certainly more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamattakaṃ kusaggena udakaṃ ubbhataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The water on the tip of a blade of grass is tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva satimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na sahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na satasahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti pokkharaṇiyā udakaṃ upanidhāya kusaggena udakaṃ ubbhatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the water in the lotus pond, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa diṭṭhisampannassa puggalassa abhisametāvino etadeva bahutaraṃ dukkhaṃ yadidaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ; appamattakaṃ avasiṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, for a person with comprehension, a noble disciple accomplished in view, the suffering that’s over and done with is more, what’s left is tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva satimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na sahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na satasahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti purimaṃ dukkhakkhandhaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ upanidhāya, yadidaṃ sattakkhattuṃparamatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the mass of suffering in the past that’s over and done with, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part, since there are at most seven more lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mahatthiyo kho, bhikkhave, dhammābhisamayo; evaṃ mahatthiyo dhammacakkhupaṭilābho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how very beneficial it is to comprehend the teaching and gain the vision of the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
