<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>13.10-10. Dutiyapabbatasutta  - 10. A Mountain (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">13.10. 10. Dutiyapabbatasutta  - 10. A Mountain (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Abhisamayavagga  - 1. Comprehension </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, himavā pabbatarājā parikkhayaṃ pariyādānaṃ gaccheyya, ṭhapetvā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose the Himalayas, the king of mountains, was worn away and eroded except for seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ, yaṃ vā himavato pabbatarājassa parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ yā vā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā avasiṭṭhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which is more: the portion of the Himalayas, the king of mountains, that has been worn away and eroded, or the seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds that are left?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ himavato pabbatarājassa yadidaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the portion of the Himalayas, the king of mountains, that has been worn away and eroded is certainly more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamattikā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā avasiṭṭhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds are tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva satimaṃ kalaṃ upenti na sahassimaṃ kalaṃ upenti na satasahassimaṃ kalaṃ upenti himavato pabbatarājassa parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ upanidhāya satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā avasiṭṭhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the Himalayas, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa diṭṭhisampannassa puggalassa abhisametāvino etadeva bahutaraṃ dukkhaṃ yadidaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, for a noble disciple accomplished in view, a person with comprehension, the suffering that’s over and done with is more, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamattakaṃ avasiṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what’s left is tiny. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva satimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na sahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti na satasahassimaṃ kalaṃ upeti purimaṃ dukkhakkhandhaṃ parikkhīṇaṃ pariyādiṇṇaṃ upanidhāya yadidaṃ sattakkhattuṃparamatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compared to the mass of suffering in the past that’s over and done with, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part, since there are at most seven more lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ mahatthiyo kho, bhikkhave, dhammābhisamayo, evaṃ mahatthiyo dhammacakkhupaṭilābho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how very beneficial it is to comprehend the teaching and gain the vision of the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
