<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.36-36. Uppādasutta  - 36. Arising </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.36. 36. Uppādasutta  - 36. Arising </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Catutthavagga  - 4. The Fourth Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo, bhikkhave, pathavīdhātuyā uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo rogānaṃ ṭhiti jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the earth element is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo āpodhātuyā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the water element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo tejodhātuyā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the fire element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo vāyodhātuyā uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo rogānaṃ ṭhiti jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the air element is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, pathavīdhātuyā nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho rogānaṃ vūpasamo jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation, settling, and ending of the earth element is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo āpodhātuyā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation, settling, and ending of the water element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo tejodhātuyā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation, settling, and ending of the fire element … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo vāyodhātuyā nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho rogānaṃ vūpasamo jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The cessation, settling, and ending of the air element is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
