<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.07-7. Saññānānattasutta  - 7. Diversity of Perceptions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.07. 7. Saññānānattasutta  - 7. Diversity of Perceptions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nānattavagga  - 1. Diversity </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātunānattaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṃ, saṅkappanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandanānattaṃ, chandanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṃ, pariḷāhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariyesanānānattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of intentions. Diversity of intentions gives rise to diversity of desires. Diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of passions gives rise to diversity of searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the diversity of elements? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātu … pe … dhammadhātu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sight element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the touch element, and the thought element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the diversity of elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṃ, saṅkappanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandanānattaṃ, chandanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṃ, pariḷāhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariyesanānānattaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of perceptions, and diversity of perceptions give rise to diversity of thoughts, and diversity of thoughts give rise to diversity of desires, and diversity of desires give rise to diversity of passions, and diversity of passions give rise to diversity of searches? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātuṃ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati rūpasaññā, rūpasaññaṃ paṭicca uppajjati rūpasaṅkappo, rūpasaṅkappaṃ paṭicca uppajjati rūpacchando, rūpacchandaṃ paṭicca uppajjati rūpapariḷāho, rūpapariḷāhaṃ paṭicca uppajjati rūpapariyesanā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights. The perception of sights gives rise to thoughts about sights. Thoughts about sights give rise to the desire for sights. The desire for sights gives rise to the passion for sights. The passion for sights gives rise to searching for sights. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammadhātuṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaññā, dhammasaññaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaṅkappo, dhammasaṅkappaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammacchando, dhammacchandaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammapariḷāho, dhammapariḷāhaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammapariyesanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The thought element gives rise to the perception of thoughts. The perception of thoughts gives rise to thoughts about thoughts. Thoughts about thoughts give rise to the desire for thoughts. The desire for thoughts gives rise to the passion for thoughts. The passion for thoughts gives rise to searching for thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ, kho, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṃ, saṅkappanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandanānattaṃ, chandanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṃ, pariḷāhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariyesanānānattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions, and diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of intentions, and diversity of intentions gives rise to diversity of desires, and diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of passions, and diversity of passions gives rise to diversity of searches.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
