<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.08-8. Nopariyesanānānattasutta  - 8. No Diversity of Searches </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.08. 8. Nopariyesanānānattasutta  - 8. No Diversity of Searches </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nānattavagga  - 1. Diversity </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātunānattaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṃ, saṅkappanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandanānattaṃ, chandanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṃ, pariḷāhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariyesanānānattaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of intentions. Diversity of intentions gives rise to diversity of desires. Diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of passions gives rise to diversity of searches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no pariyesanānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṃ, no pariḷāhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandanānattaṃ, no chandanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṃ, no saṅkappanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, no saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Diversity of searches doesn’t give rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of passions doesn’t give rise to diversity of desires. Diversity of desires doesn’t give rise to diversity of thoughts. Diversity of thoughts doesn’t give rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the diversity of elements? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātu … pe … dhammadhātu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sight element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the touch element, and the thought element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the diversity of elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati … pe … pariyesanānānattaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of perceptions … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no pariyesanānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṃ, no pariḷāhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandanānattaṃ, no chandanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṃ, no saṅkappanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, no saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātuṃ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati rūpasaññā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammadhātuṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaññā, dhammasaññaṃ paṭicca uppajjati … pe … dhammapariyesanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The thought element gives rise to the perception of thoughts … the search for thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no dhammapariyesanaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammapariḷāho, no dhammapariḷāhaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammacchando, no dhammacchandaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaṅkappo, no dhammasaṅkappaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaññā, no dhammasaññaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhammadhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The search for thoughts doesn’t give rise to the passion for thoughts. The passion for thoughts doesn’t give rise to the desire for thoughts. The desire for thoughts doesn’t give rise to thoughts about thoughts. Thoughts about thoughts don’t give rise to perceptions of thoughts. Perceptions of thoughts don’t give rise to the thought element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati … pe … pariyesanānānattaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no pariyesanānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṃ, no pariḷāhanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati chandanānattaṃ, no chandanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṃ, no saṅkappanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṃ, no saññānānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
