<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.14-14. Hīnādhimuttikasutta  - 14. Bad Attitudes </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.14. 14. Hīnādhimuttikasutta  - 14. Bad Attitudes </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have a bad attitude come together and converge with those who have a bad attitude. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇādhimuttikā kalyāṇādhimuttikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have a good attitude come together and converge with those who have a good attitude. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atītampi kho, bhikkhave, addhānaṃ dhātusova sattā saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past, too, sentient beings came together and converged because of an element. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇādhimuttikā kalyāṇādhimuttikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandiṃsu samiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgatampi kho, bhikkhave, addhānaṃ dhātusova sattā saṃsandissanti samessanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the future, too, sentient beings will come together and converge because of an element. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandissanti samessanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇādhimuttikā kalyāṇādhimuttikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandissanti samessanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahipi kho, bhikkhave, paccuppannaṃ addhānaṃ dhātusova sattā saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have a bad attitude come together and converge with those who have a bad attitude. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇādhimuttikā kalyāṇādhimuttikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who have a good attitude come together and converge with those who have a good attitude.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
