<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.11-11. Sattadhātusutta  - 11. Seven Elements </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.11. 11. Sattadhātusutta  - 11. Seven Elements </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattimā, bhikkhave, dhātuyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these seven elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ābhādhātu, subhadhātu, ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu, viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu, ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu, saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The element of light, the element of beauty, the element of the dimension of infinite space, the element of the dimension of infinite consciousness, the element of the dimension of nothingness, the element of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, and the element of the cessation of perception and feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imā kho, bhikkhave, satta dhātuyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven elements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yā cāyaṃ, bhante, ābhādhātu yā ca subhadhātu yā ca ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu yā ca viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu yā ca ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu yā ca nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu yā ca saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu—imā nu kho, bhante, dhātuyo kiṃ paṭicca paññāyantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, due to what does each of these elements appear?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāyaṃ, bhikkhu, ābhādhātu—ayaṃ dhātu andhakāraṃ paṭicca paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, the element of light appears due to the element of darkness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ, bhikkhu, subhadhātu—ayaṃ dhātu asubhaṃ paṭicca paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The element of beauty appears due to the element of ugliness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ, bhikkhu, ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu—ayaṃ dhātu rūpaṃ paṭicca paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The element of the dimension of infinite space appears due to the element of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ, bhikkhu, viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu—ayaṃ dhātu ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ paṭicca paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The element of the dimension of infinite consciousness appears due to the element of the dimension of infinite space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ, bhikkhu, ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu—ayaṃ dhātu viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ paṭicca paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The element of the dimension of nothingness appears due to the element of the dimension of infinite consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ, bhikkhu, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu—ayaṃ dhātu ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ paṭicca paññāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The element of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception appears due to the element of the dimension of nothingness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ, bhikkhu, saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu—ayaṃ dhātu nirodhaṃ paṭicca paññāyatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The element of the cessation of perception and feeling appears due to the element of cessation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā cāyaṃ, bhante, ābhādhātu yā ca subhadhātu yā ca ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu yā ca viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu yā ca ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu yā ca nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu yā ca saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu—imā nu kho, bhante, dhātuyo kathaṃ samāpatti pattabbā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how is each of these elements to be attained?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā cāyaṃ, bhikkhu, ābhādhātu yā ca subhadhātu yā ca ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu yā ca viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu yā ca ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu—imā dhātuyo saññāsamāpatti pattabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The elements of light, beauty, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness, and the dimension of nothingness are attainments with perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ, bhikkhu, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu—ayaṃ dhātu saṅkhārāvasesasamāpatti pattabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The element of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception is an attainment with only a residue of conditioned phenomena. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyaṃ, bhikkhu, saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu—ayaṃ dhātu nirodhasamāpatti pattabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The element of the cessation of perception and feeling is an attainment of cessation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
