<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.25-25. Pañcasikkhāpadasutta  - 25. The Five Precepts </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.25. 25. Pañcasikkhāpadasutta  - 25. The Five Precepts </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Kammapathavagga  - 3. Ways of Performing Deeds </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātino pāṇātipātīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who kill living creatures with those who kill living creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adinnādāyino adinnādāyīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who steal … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmesumicchācārino kāmesumicchācārīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">commit sexual misconduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādino musāvādīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">lie … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">surāmerayamajjappamādaṭṭhāyino surāmerayamajjappamādaṭṭhāyīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consume alcoholic drinks that cause negligence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātā paṭiviratā pāṇātipātā paṭiviratehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who refrain from killing living creatures … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adinnādānā paṭiviratā adinnādānā paṭiviratehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who refrain from stealing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmesumicchācārā paṭiviratā kāmesumicchācārā paṭiviratehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who refrain from sexual misconduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādā paṭiviratā musāvādā paṭiviratehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who refrain from lying … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">surāmerayamajjappamādaṭṭhānā paṭiviratā surāmerayamajjappamādaṭṭhānā paṭiviratehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who refrain from consuming alcoholic drinks that cause negligence with those who refrain from consuming alcoholic drinks that cause negligence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
