<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>14.03-3. Nophassanānattasutta  - 3. Not Diversity of Contacts </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">14.03. 3. Nophassanānattasutta  - 3. Not Diversity of Contacts </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Nānattavagga  - 1. Diversity </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātunānattaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṃ, no phassanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts. Diversity of contacts doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the diversity of elements? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhudhātu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye element, ear element, nose element, tongue element, body element, and mind element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manodhātu—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the diversity of elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṃ, no phassanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts, while diversity of contacts doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhudhātuṃ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati cakkhusamphasso, no cakkhusamphassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati cakkhudhātu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eye element gives rise to eye contact. Eye contact doesn’t give rise to the eye element. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manodhātuṃ paṭicca uppajjati manosamphasso, no manosamphassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati manodhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind element gives rise to mind contact. Mind contact doesn’t give rise to the mind element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṃ, no phassanānattaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, while diversity of contacts doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
