<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>15.05-5. Pabbatasutta  - 5. A Mountain </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">15.05. 5. Pabbatasutta  - 5. A Mountain </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati … pe … ārāme … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kīvadīgho nu kho, bhante, kappo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how long is an eon?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dīgho kho, bhikkhu, kappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, an eon is long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So na sukaro saṅkhātuṃ ettakāni vassāni iti vā, ettakāni vassasatāni iti vā, ettakāni vassasahassāni iti vā, ettakāni vassasatasahassāni iti vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy to calculate how many years, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of years it lasts.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkā pana, bhante, upamaṃ kātun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, is it possible to give a simile?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkā, bhikkhū”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s possible,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, mahāselo pabbato yojanaṃ āyāmena yojanaṃ vitthārena yojanaṃ ubbedhena acchinno asusiro ekagghano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suppose there was a huge stone mountain, a league long, a league wide, and a league high, with no cracks or holes, one solid mass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ puriso vassasatassa vassasatassa accayena kāsikena vatthena sakiṃ sakiṃ parimajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as each century passed someone would stroke it with a fine cloth from Kāsī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khippataraṃ kho so, bhikkhu, mahāselo pabbato iminā upakkamena parikkhayaṃ pariyādānaṃ gaccheyya, na tveva kappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">By this means the huge stone mountain would be worn away before the eon comes to an end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dīgho, bhikkhu, kappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how long an eon is. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dīghānaṃ kho, bhikkhu, kappānaṃ neko kappo saṃsito, nekaṃ kappasataṃ saṃsitaṃ, nekaṃ kappasahassaṃ saṃsitaṃ, nekaṃ kappasatasahassaṃ saṃsitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And we’ve transmigrated through many such eons, many hundreds, many thousands, many hundreds of thousands. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhu, saṃsāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Transmigration has no known beginning. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbā koṭi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvañcidaṃ, bhikkhu, alameva sabbasaṅkhāresu nibbindituṃ, alaṃ virajjituṃ, alaṃ vimuccitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
