<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>15.13-13. Tiṃsamattasutta  - 13. Thirty Mendicants </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">15.13. 13. Tiṃsamattasutta  - 13. Thirty Mendicants </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Dutiyavagga  - 2. The Second Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājagahe viharati veḷuvane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tiṃsamattā pāveyyakā bhikkhū sabbe āraññikā sabbe piṇḍapātikā sabbe paṃsukūlikā sabbe tecīvarikā sabbe sasaṃyojanā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then thirty mendicants from Pāvā went to the Buddha. All of them lived in the wilderness, ate only alms-food, wore rag robes, and owned just three robes; yet they all still had fetters. They bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ime kho tiṃsamattā pāveyyakā bhikkhū sabbe āraññikā sabbe piṇḍapātikā sabbe paṃsukūlikā sabbe tecīvarikā sabbe sasaṃyojanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These thirty mendicants from Pāvā live in the wilderness, eat only alms-food, wear rag robes, and own just three robes; yet they all still have fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ imesaṃ tathā dhammaṃ deseyyaṃ yathā nesaṃ imasmiṃyeva āsane anupādāya āsavehi cittāni vimucceyyun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I teach them the Dhamma in such a way that their minds are freed from defilements by not grasping while sitting in this very seat?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, transmigration has no known beginning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbā koṭi na paññāyati avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṃ nu kho bahutaraṃ, yaṃ vā vo iminā dīghena addhunā sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ sīsacchinnānaṃ lohitaṃ passannaṃ paggharitaṃ, yaṃ vā catūsu mahāsamuddesu udakan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think? Which is more: the flow of blood you’ve shed when your head was chopped off while roaming and transmigrating for such a very long time, or the water in the four oceans?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kho mayaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāma, etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṃ, yaṃ no iminā dīghena addhunā sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ sīsacchinnānaṃ lohitaṃ passannaṃ paggharitaṃ, na tveva catūsu mahāsamuddesu udakan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“As we understand the Buddha’s teaching, the flow of blood we’ve shed when our head was chopped off while roaming and transmigrating is more than the water in the four oceans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhave, sādhu kho me tumhe, bhikkhave, evaṃ dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, mendicants! It’s good that you understand my teaching like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadeva, bhikkhave, bahutaraṃ, yaṃ vo iminā dīghena addhunā sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ sīsacchinnānaṃ lohitaṃ passannaṃ paggharitaṃ, na tveva catūsu mahāsamuddesu udakaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The flow of blood you’ve shed when your head was chopped off while roaming and transmigrating is indeed more than the water in the four oceans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīgharattaṃ vo, bhikkhave, gunnaṃ sataṃ gobhūtānaṃ sīsacchinnānaṃ lohitaṃ passannaṃ paggharitaṃ, na tveva catūsu mahāsamuddesu udakaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a long time you’ve been cows, and the flow of blood you’ve shed when your head was chopped off as a cow is more than the water in the four oceans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīgharattaṃ vo, bhikkhave, mahiṃsānaṃ sataṃ mahiṃsabhūtānaṃ sīsacchinnānaṃ lohitaṃ passannaṃ paggharitaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a long time you’ve been buffalo … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dīgharattaṃ vo, bhikkhave, urabbhānaṃ sataṃ urabbhabhūtānaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">rams … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānaṃ sataṃ ajabhūtānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">goats … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">migānaṃ sataṃ migabhūtānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">deer … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuṭānaṃ sataṃ kukkuṭabhūtānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">chickens … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sūkarānaṃ sataṃ sūkarabhūtānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">pigs … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dīgharattaṃ vo, bhikkhave, corā gāmaghātāti gahetvā sīsacchinnānaṃ lohitaṃ passannaṃ paggharitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a long time you’ve been bandits, arrested for raiding villages, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīgharattaṃ vo, bhikkhave, corā pāripanthikāti gahetvā sīsacchinnānaṃ lohitaṃ passannaṃ paggharitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">highway robbery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīgharattaṃ vo, bhikkhave, corā pāradārikāti gahetvā sīsacchinnānaṃ lohitaṃ passannaṃ paggharitaṃ, na tveva catūsu mahāsamuddesu udakaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or adultery. And the flow of blood you’ve shed when your head was chopped off as a bandit is more than the water in the four oceans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Transmigration has no known beginning. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">alaṃ vimuccitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imasmiñca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne tiṃsamattānaṃ pāveyyakānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ anupādāya āsavehi cittāni vimucciṃsūti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of the thirty mendicants from Pāvā were freed from defilements by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
