<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>15.01-1. Tiṇakaṭṭhasutta  - 1. Grass and Sticks </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">15.01. 1. Tiṇakaṭṭhasutta  - 1. Grass and Sticks </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, transmigration has no known beginning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbā koṭi na paññāyati avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso yaṃ imasmiṃ jambudīpe tiṇakaṭṭhasākhāpalāsaṃ taṃ chetvā ekajjhaṃ saṃharitvā caturaṅgulaṃ caturaṅgulaṃ ghaṭikaṃ katvā nikkhipeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a person was to strip all the grass, sticks, branches, and leaves in India, gather them together into one pile, and chop them each into four inch pieces. They’d lay them down, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ me mātā, tassā me mātu ayaṃ mātā’ti, apariyādinnāva, bhikkhave, tassa purisassa mātumātaro assu, atha imasmiṃ jambudīpe tiṇakaṭṭhasākhāpalāsaṃ parikkhayaṃ pariyādānaṃ gaccheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is my mother, this is my grandmother.’ The grass, sticks, branches, and leaves of India would run out before that person’s mothers and grandmothers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anamataggoyaṃ, bhikkhave, saṃsāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Transmigration has no known beginning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbā koṭi na paññāyati avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dīgharattaṃ vo, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ paccanubhūtaṃ tibbaṃ paccanubhūtaṃ byasanaṃ paccanubhūtaṃ, kaṭasī vaḍḍhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For such a long time you have undergone suffering, agony, and disaster, swelling the cemeteries. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvañcidaṃ, bhikkhave, alameva sabbasaṅkhāresu nibbindituṃ alaṃ virajjituṃ alaṃ vimuccitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
