<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>15.08-8. Gaṅgāsutta  - 8. The Ganges </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">15.08. 8. Gaṅgāsutta  - 8. The Ganges </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājagahe viharati veḷuvane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and asked the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kīvabahukā nu kho, bho gotama, kappā abbhatītā atikkantā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how many eons have passed?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bahukā kho, brāhmaṇa, kappā abbhatītā atikkantā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, many eons have passed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te na sukarā saṅkhātuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy to calculate </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakā kappā iti vā, ettakāni kappasatāni iti vā, ettakāni kappasahassāni iti vā, ettakāni kappasatasahassāni iti vā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how many eons have passed, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of eons.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkā pana, bho gotama, upamaṃ kātun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, can you give a simile?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sakkā, brāhmaṇā”ti bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I can,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, brāhmaṇa, yato cāyaṃ gaṅgā nadī pabhavati yattha ca mahāsamuddaṃ appeti, yā etasmiṃ antare vālikā sā na sukarā saṅkhātuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Consider the Ganges river from where it originates to where it enters the ocean. Between these places it’s not easy to calculate </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakā vālikā iti vā, ettakāni vālikasatāni iti vā, ettakāni vālikasahassāni iti vā, ettakāni vālikasatasahassāni iti vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how many grains of sand there are, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of grains of sand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato bahutarā kho, brāhmaṇa, kappā abbhatītā atikkantā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The eons that have passed are more than this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te na sukarā saṅkhātuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not easy to calculate </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakā kappā iti vā, ettakāni kappasatāni iti vā, ettakāni kappasahassāni iti vā, ettakāni kappasatasahassāni iti vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">how many eons have passed, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of eons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anamataggoyaṃ, brāhmaṇa, saṃsāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Transmigration has no known beginning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbā koṭi na paññāyati avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ sandhāvataṃ saṃsarataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dīgharattaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, dukkhaṃ paccanubhūtaṃ tibbaṃ paccanubhūtaṃ byasanaṃ paccanubhūtaṃ, kaṭasī vaḍḍhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For such a long time you have undergone suffering, agony, and disaster, swelling the cemeteries. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvañcidaṃ, brāhmaṇa, alameva sabbasaṅkhāresu nibbindituṃ, alaṃ virajjituṃ, alaṃ vimuccitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, so brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the brahmin said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
