<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>17.04-4. Dīghalomikasutta  - 4. A Fleecy Sheep </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">17.04. 4. Dīghalomikasutta  - 4. A Fleecy Sheep </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dāruṇo, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … adhigamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Possessions, honor, and popularity are brutal … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dīghalomikā eḷakā kaṇṭakagahanaṃ paviseyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a fleecy sheep was to enter a briar patch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tatra tatra sajjeyya, tatra tatra gayheyya, tatra tatra bajjheyya, tatra tatra anayabyasanaṃ āpajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’d get caught, snagged, and trapped at every turn, coming to ruin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco bhikkhu lābhasakkārasilokena abhibhūto pariyādiṇṇacitto pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā piṇḍāya pavisati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, take a certain mendicant whose mind is overcome and overwhelmed by possessions, honor, and popularity. They robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl and robe, enter the village or town for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tatra tatra sajjati, tatra tatra gayhati, tatra tatra bajjhati, tatra tatra anayabyasanaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get caught, snagged, and trapped at every turn, coming to ruin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
