<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>17.02-2. Baḷisasutta  - 2. A Hook </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">17.02. 2. Baḷisasutta  - 2. A Hook </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dāruṇo, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko kaṭuko pharuso antarāyiko anuttarassa yogakkhemassa adhigamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Possessions, honor, and popularity are brutal, bitter, and harsh. They’re an obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, bāḷisiko āmisagataṃ baḷisaṃ gambhīre udakarahade pakkhipeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a fisherman was to cast a baited hook into a deep lake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ aññataro āmisacakkhu maccho gileyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing the bait, a fish would swallow it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi so, bhikkhave, maccho gilabaḷiso bāḷisikassa anayaṃ āpanno byasanaṃ āpanno yathākāmakaraṇīyo bāḷisikassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so the fish that swallowed the hook would meet with tragedy and disaster, and the fisherman can do what he wants with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bāḷisikoti kho, bhikkhave, mārassetaṃ pāpimato adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Fisherman’ is a term for Māra the Wicked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Baḷisanti kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasilokassetaṃ adhivacanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Hook’ is a term for possessions, honor, and popularity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu uppannaṃ lābhasakkārasilokaṃ assādeti nikāmeti, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu gilabaḷiso mārassa anayaṃ āpanno byasanaṃ āpanno yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever enjoys and likes arisen possessions, honor, and popularity is called a mendicant who has swallowed Māra’s hook. They’ve met with tragedy and disaster, and the Wicked One can do what he wants with them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko kaṭuko pharuso antarāyiko anuttarassa yogakkhemassa adhigamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity—bitter and harsh, an obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘uppannaṃ lābhasakkārasilokaṃ pajahissāma, na ca no uppanno lābhasakkārasiloko cittaṃ pariyādāya ṭhassatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will give up arisen possessions, honor, and popularity, and we won’t let them occupy our minds.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
