<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>17.05-5. Mīḷhakasutta  - 5. A Dung Beetle </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">17.05. 5. Mīḷhakasutta  - 5. A Dung Beetle </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Paṭhamavagga  - 1. The First Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dāruṇo, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … adhigamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Possessions, honor, and popularity are brutal … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mīḷhakā gūthādī gūthapūrā puṇṇā gūthassa. Purato cassa mahāgūthapuñjo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a dung-eating beetle full of dung, stuffed with dung, and before her was a huge pile of dung. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tena aññā mīḷhakā atimaññeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’d look down on other beetles, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahamhi gūthādī gūthapūrā puṇṇā gūthassa, purato ca myāyaṃ mahāgūthapuñjo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘For I am a dung-eating beetle full of dung, stuffed with dung, and before me is a huge pile of dung.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco bhikkhu lābhasakkārasilokena abhibhūto pariyādiṇṇacitto pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā piṇḍāya pavisati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, take a certain mendicant whose mind is overcome and overwhelmed by possessions, honor, and popularity. They robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl and robe, enter the village or town for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha bhuttāvī ca hoti yāvadattho, nimantito ca svātanāya, piṇḍapāto cassa pūro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There they eat as much as they like, get invited back tomorrow, and have plenty of alms-food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ārāmaṃ gantvā bhikkhugaṇassa majjhe vikatthati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they get back to the monastery, they boast in the middle of a group of mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhuttāvī camhi yāvadattho, nimantito camhi svātanāya, piṇḍapāto ca myāyaṃ pūro, lābhī camhi cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ, ime panaññe bhikkhū appapuññā appesakkhā na lābhino cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I ate as much as I liked, got invited back tomorrow, and had plenty of alms-food. I get robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. But these other mendicants have little merit or significance, so they don’t get these things.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lābhasakkārasilokena abhibhūto pariyādiṇṇacitto aññe pesale bhikkhū atimaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With a mind overcome and overwhelmed by possessions, honor, and popularity, they look down on other good-hearted mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi tassa, bhikkhave, moghapurisassa hoti dīgharattaṃ ahitāya dukkhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This will be for their lasting harm and suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañhi vo bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
