<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>21.11-11. Mahākappinasutta  - 11. With Mahākappina </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">21.11. 11. Mahākappinasutta  - 11. With Mahākappina </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhuvagga  - 1. Monks </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā mahākappino yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Mahākappina went to see the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ mahākappinaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha saw him coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passatha no tumhe, bhikkhave, etaṃ bhikkhuṃ āgacchantaṃ odātakaṃ tanukaṃ tuṅganāsikan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, do you you see that monk coming—white, thin, with a pointy nose?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eso kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mahiddhiko mahānubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That mendicant is very mighty and powerful. It’s not easy to find an attainment that he has not already attained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca sā samāpatti sulabharūpā yā tena bhikkhunā asamāpannapubbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa catthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti tadanuttaraṃ brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he has realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khattiyo seṭṭho janetasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The aristocrat is best of those people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye gottapaṭisārino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who take clan as the standard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjācaraṇasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so seṭṭho devamānuse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is best of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Divā tapati ādicco, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sun shines by day, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattimābhāti candimā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the moon glows at night, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannaddho khattiyo tapati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the aristocrat shines in armor, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jhāyī tapati brāhmaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the brahmin shines in absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha sabbamahorattiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But all day and all night, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho tapati tejasā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddha shines with glory.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
