<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>21.05-5. Sujātasutta  - 5. With Sujāta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">21.05. 5. Sujātasutta  - 5. With Sujāta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhuvagga  - 1. Monks </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sujāto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sujāta went to see the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ sujātaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha saw him coming off in the distance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ubhayenevāyaṃ, bhikkhave, kulaputto sobhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This gentleman is beautiful in both ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca abhirūpo dassanīyo pāsādiko paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgato, yassa catthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti tadanuttaraṃ brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. And he has realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sobhati vatāyaṃ bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This mendicant is truly beautiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujubhūtena cetasā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">His heart is upright, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vippayutto visaṃyutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’s unfettered, detached, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupādāya nibbuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">extinguished by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhāreti antimaṃ dehaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He carries his final body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jetvā māraṃ savāhinin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having vanquished Māra and his mount.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
