<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>21.02-2. Upatissasutta  - 2. With Upatissa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">21.02. 2. Upatissasutta  - 2. With Upatissa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhuvagga  - 1. Monks </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthinidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho āyasmā sāriputto bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āvuso bhikkhave”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āvuso”ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato sāriputtassa paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā sāriputto etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha mayhaṃ, āvuso, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just now, reverends, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi nu kho taṃ kiñci lokasmiṃ yassa me vipariṇāmaññathābhāvā uppajjeyyuṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Is there anything in the world whose changing and perishing would give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in me?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi kho taṃ kiñci lokasmiṃ yassa me vipariṇāmaññathābhāvā uppajjeyyuṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is nothing in the world whose changing and perishing would give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in me.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“satthupi kho te, āvuso sāriputta, vipariṇāmaññathābhāvā nuppajjeyyuṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Even if the Teacher were to decay and perish? Wouldn’t that give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satthupi kho me, āvuso, vipariṇāmaññathābhāvā nuppajjeyyuṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā, api ca me evamassa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Even if the Teacher were to decay and perish, that wouldn’t give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in me. Still, I would think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mahesakkho vata bho satthā antarahito mahiddhiko mahānubhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Alas, the illustrious Teacher, so mighty and powerful, has vanished! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace hi bhagavā ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyya tadassa bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the Buddha was to remain for a long time, that would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā hi panāyasmato sāriputtassa dīgharattaṃ ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā susamūhatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated ego, possessiveness, and the underlying tendency to conceit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā āyasmato sāriputtassa satthupi vipariṇāmaññathābhāvā nuppajjeyyuṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So even if the Teacher were to decay and perish, it wouldn’t give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in him.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
