<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>21.04-4. Navasutta  - 4. A Junior Mendicant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">21.04. 4. Navasutta  - 4. A Junior Mendicant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bhikkhuvagga  - 1. Monks </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro navo bhikkhu pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto vihāraṃ pavisitvā appossukko tuṇhībhūto saṅkasāyati, na bhikkhūnaṃ veyyāvaccaṃ karoti cīvarakārasamaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a certain junior monk, after his meal, on his return from alms-round, entered his dwelling, where he adhered to passivity and silence. And he didn’t help the mendicants out when it was time to sew robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha, bhante, aññataro navo bhikkhu pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto vihāraṃ pavisitvā appossukko tuṇhībhūto saṅkasāyati, na bhikkhūnaṃ veyyāvaccaṃ karoti cīvarakārasamaye”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā aññataraṃ bhikkhuṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha said to a certain monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mama vacanena taṃ bhikkhuṃ āmantehi ‘satthā taṃ, āvuso, āmantetī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, monk, in my name tell that monk that the Teacher summons him.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato paṭissutvā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” that monk replied. He went to that monk and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“satthā taṃ, āvuso, āmantetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, the teacher summons you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho so bhikkhu tassa bhikkhuno paṭissutvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho taṃ bhikkhuṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” that monk replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṃ kira tvaṃ, bhikkhu, pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto vihāraṃ pavisitvā appossukko tuṇhībhūto saṅkasāyasi, na bhikkhūnaṃ veyyāvaccaṃ karosi cīvarakārasamaye”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it really true, monk, that after your meal, on your return from alms-round, you entered your dwelling, where you adhered to passivity and silence, and you didn’t help the mendicants out when it was time to sew robes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahampi kho, bhante, sakaṃ kiccaṃ karomī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I am doing my own work.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassa bhikkhuno cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing what that monk was thinking, addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mā kho tumhe, bhikkhave, etassa bhikkhuno ujjhāyittha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, don’t complain about this monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, yassa catthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṃ brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This monk gets the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. He has realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nayidaṃ sithilamārabbha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Not by being slack, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nayidaṃ appena thāmasā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or with little strength </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbānaṃ adhigantabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is extinguishment realized, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbadukkhappamocanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the freedom from all suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayañca daharo bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This young monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamuttamapuriso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">this best of men, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhāreti antimaṃ dehaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">carries his final body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jetvā māraṃ savāhinin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having vanquished Māra and his mount.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
