<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Dasa atthavase paṭicca tathāgatena sāvakānaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ— - “The Buddha laid down the training rules for his disciples for ten reasons: </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr9_root-pli-ms.j. Dasa atthavase paṭicca tathāgatena sāvakānaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ— - “The Buddha laid down the training rules for his disciples for ten reasons: </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghasuṭṭhutāya, saṅghaphāsutāya, dummaṅkūnaṁ puggalānaṁ niggahāya, pesalānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ phāsuvihārāya, diṭṭhadhammikānaṁ āsavānaṁ saṁvarāya, samparāyikānaṁ āsavānaṁ paṭighātāya, appasannānaṁ pasādāya, pasannānaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya, saddhammaṭṭhitiyā vinayānuggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the well-being of the Sangha, for the comfort of the Sangha, for the restraint of bad people, for the ease of good monks, for the restraint of corruptions relating to the present life, for the restraint of corruptions relating to future lives, to give rise to confidence in those without it, to increase the confidence of those who have it, for the longevity of the true Teaching, and for supporting the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ saṅghaphāsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also the comfort of the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ dummaṅkūnaṁ puggalānaṁ niggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also for the restraint of bad people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ dummaṅkūnaṁ puggalānaṁ niggahāya taṁ pesalānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ phāsuvihārāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The restraint of bad people is also for the ease of good monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ pesalānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ phāsuvihārāya taṁ diṭṭhadhammikānaṁ āsavānaṁ saṁvarāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ease of good monks is also for the restraint of corruptions in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ diṭṭhadhammikānaṁ āsavānaṁ saṁvarāya taṁ samparāyikānaṁ āsavānaṁ paṭighātāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The restraint of corruptions relating to the present life is also for the restraint of corruptions relating to future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ samparāyikānaṁ āsavānaṁ paṭighātāya taṁ appasannānaṁ pasādāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The restraint of corruption relating to future lives is also to give rise to confidence in those without it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ appasannānaṁ pasādāya taṁ pasannānaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The giving rise to confidence in those without it is also to increase the confidence of those who have it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ pasannānaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya taṁ saddhammaṭṭhitiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The increase in confidence of those who have it is also for the longevity of the true Teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saddhammaṭṭhitiyā taṁ vinayānuggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The longevity of the true Teaching is also for supporting the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ saṅghaphāsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also the comfort of the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ dummaṅkūnaṁ puggalānaṁ niggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also for the restraint of bad people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ pesalānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ phāsuvihārāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also for the ease of good monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ diṭṭhadhammikānaṁ āsavānaṁ saṁvarāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also for the restraint of corruptions relating to the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ samparāyikānaṁ āsavānaṁ paṭighātāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also for the restraint of corruptions relating to future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ appasannānaṁ pasādāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also to give rise to confidence in those without it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ pasannānaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also to increase the confidence of those who have it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ saddhammaṭṭhitiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also for the longevity of the true Teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu taṁ vinayānuggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The well-being of the Sangha is also for supporting the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ dummaṅkūnaṁ puggalānaṁ niggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also for the restraint of bad people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ pesalānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ phāsuvihārāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also the ease of good monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ diṭṭhadhammikānaṁ āsavānaṁ saṁvarāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also for the restraint of corruptions relating to the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ samparāyikānaṁ āsavānaṁ paṭighātāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also for the restraint of corruptions relating to future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ appasannānaṁ pasādāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also to give rise to confidence in those without it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ pasannānaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also to increase the confidence of those who have it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ saddhammaṭṭhitiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also for the longevity of the true Teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ vinayānuggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also for supporting the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ saṅghaphāsu taṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The comfort of the Sangha is also the well-being of the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ dummaṅkūnaṁ puggalānaṁ niggahāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The restraint of bad people … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ pesalānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ phāsuvihārāya …</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ease of good monks … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ diṭṭhadhammikānaṁ āsavānaṁ saṁvarāya …</span></p>
<p class="p3">The restraint of corruptions relating to the present life … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ samparāyikānaṁ āsavānaṁ paṭighātāya …</span></p>
<p class="p3">The restraint of corruptions relating to future lives … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ appasannānaṁ pasādāya …</span></p>
<p class="p3">The giving rise to confidence in those without it … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ pasannānaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya …</span></p>
<p class="p3">The increase in confidence of those who have it … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ saddhammaṭṭhitiyā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">The longevity of the true Teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ vinayānuggahāya taṁ saṅghasuṭṭhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The support of the training is also the well-being of the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ vinayānuggahāya taṁ saṅghaphāsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The support of the training is also the comfort of the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ vinayānuggahāya taṁ dummaṅkūnaṁ puggalānaṁ niggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The support of the training is also for the restraint of bad people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ vinayānuggahāya taṁ pesalānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ phāsuvihārāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The support of the training is also for the ease of good monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ vinayānuggahāya taṁ diṭṭhadhammikānaṁ āsavānaṁ saṁvarāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The support of the training is also for the restraint of corruptions relating to the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ vinayānuggahāya taṁ samparāyikānaṁ āsavānaṁ paṭighātāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The support of the training is also for the restraint of corruptions relating to future lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ vinayānuggahāya taṁ appasannānaṁ pasādāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The support of the training is also to give rise to confidence in those without it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ vinayānuggahāya taṁ pasannānaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The support of the training is also to increase the confidence of those who have it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ vinayānuggahāya taṁ saddhammaṭṭhitiyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The support of the training is also for the longevity of the true Teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthasataṁ dhammasataṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“A hundred purposes, a hundred teachings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve ca niruttisatāni;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And two hundred expressions; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāri ñāṇasatāni,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Four hundred knowledges, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthavase pakaraṇeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the exposition of the reasons.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthavasapakaraṇaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The exposition of reasons is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāvaggo niṭṭhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The long division is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṁ aṭṭhapucchāyaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“First eight on questions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccayesu punaṭṭha ca;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And then eight on ‘a result of’; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūnaṁ soḷasa ete,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixteen for monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīnañca soḷasa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And sixteen for nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Peyyālaantarā bhedā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The middle repetition, sub-division, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekuttarikameva ca;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And increasing by one; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavāraṇatthavasikā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Invitation, about reasons—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahāvaggassa saṅgahoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is included in the long division.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthavasapakaraṇaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The exposition of reasons is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
