<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Dutiyabhāga - Part two </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr1.16_root-pli-ms.j. Dutiyabhāga - Part two </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">8. Samuccayavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">8. The section that collects together </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of having sexual intercourse, how many kinds of offenses does one commit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā catasso āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits four kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkhāyite sarīre methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevati, āpatti pārājikassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one has sexual intercourse with an undecomposed corpse, one commits an offense entailing expulsion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena khāyite sarīre methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one has sexual intercourse with a mostly decomposed corpse, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṭṭakate mukhe acchupantaṁ aṅgajātaṁ paveseti, āpatti dukkaṭassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one inserts the penis without touching into a wide open mouth, one commits an offense of wrong conduct; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jatumaṭṭhake pācittiyaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one uses a dildo, one commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā imā catasso āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to these offenses, to how many of the four kinds of failure do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">In how many of the seven classes of offenses are they found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses do they originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">To which of the four kinds of legal issues do they belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues are they settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ dve vipattiyo bhajanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They belong to two kinds of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sīlavipattiṁ siyā ācāravipattiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be failure in morality; they may be failure in conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ catūhi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are found in four classes of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā pārājikāpattikkhandhena, siyā thullaccayāpattikkhandhena, siyā pācittiyāpattikkhandhena, siyā dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be in the class of offenses entailing expulsion; they may be in the class of serious offenses; they may be in the class of offenses entailing confession; they may be in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ ekena samuṭṭhānena samuṭṭhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They originate in one way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti, na vācato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ, āpattādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are legal issues arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ, tīhi samathehi sammanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are settled in three ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca, paṭiññātakaraṇena ca, siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena ca …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; or they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result of, out of disrespect, defecating, urinating, or spitting in water, how many kinds of offenses does one commit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā ekaṁ āpattiṁ āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits one kind of offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkaṭaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā imaṁ ekaṁ āpattiṁ āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā āpatti catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to this offense, to how many of the four kinds of failure does it belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">In how many of the seven classes of offenses is it found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhāti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses does it originate? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">To which of the four kinds of legal issues does it belong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues is it settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā āpatti catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ ekaṁ vipattiṁ bhajati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It belongs to one kind of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ācāravipattiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">failure in conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ ekena āpattikkhandhena saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is found in one class of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ ekena samuṭṭhānena samuṭṭhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It originates in one way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhāti, na vācato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ, āpattādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a legal issue arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ tīhi samathehi sammati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is settled through three principles: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca paṭiññātakaraṇena ca, siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; or it may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuccayavāro niṭṭhito aṭṭhamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth section that collects together is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhapaccayavārā niṭṭhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eight sections on “as a result of” are finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāvibhaṅge soḷasamahāvārā niṭṭhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixteen large sections in the great analysis are finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuvibhaṅgamahāvāro niṭṭhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The large section on the monks’ rules and their analysis is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
