<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Dutiyabhāga - Part two </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr1.12_root-pli-ms.j. Dutiyabhāga - Part two </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">4. Saṅgahitavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">4. The section on “being found in” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā āpattiyo sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses that are a result of having sexual intercourse, in how many of the seven classes of offenses are they found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā āpattiyo sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ catūhi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are found in four: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā pārājikāpattikkhandhena, siyā thullaccayāpattikkhandhena, siyā pācittiyāpattikkhandhena, siyā dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be in the class of offenses entailing expulsion; they may be in the class of serious offenses; they may be in the class of offenses entailing confession; they may be in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā āpatti sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offense that is a result of, out of disrespect, defecating, urinating, or spitting in water, in how many of the seven classes of offenses is it found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā āpatti sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ ekena āpattikkhandhena saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is found in one: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgahitavāro niṭṭhito catuttho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth section on “being found in” is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
