<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Dutiyabhāga - Part two </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr1.15_root-pli-ms.j. Dutiyabhāga - Part two </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">7. Samathavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">7. The section on settling </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā āpattiyo sattannaṁ samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offenses that are a result of having sexual intercourse, through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues are they settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanapaccayā āpattiyo sattannaṁ samathānaṁ tīhi samathehi sammanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through three of them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca paṭiññātakaraṇena ca;</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena ca …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā āpatti sattannaṁ samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to the offense that is a result of, out of disrespect, defecating, urinating, or spitting in water, through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues is it settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karaṇapaccayā āpatti sattannaṁ samathānaṁ tīhi samathehi sammati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Through three of them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca paṭiññātakaraṇena ca, siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; or it may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samathavāro niṭṭhito sattamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh section on settling is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
