<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Paṭhamabhāga - Part one </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-pvr1.8_root-pli-ms.j. Paṭhamabhāga - Part one </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">8. Samuccayavāra</span></p>
<p class="p3">8. The section that collects together </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3"> For having sexual intercourse, how many kinds of offenses does one commit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto tisso āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits three kinds of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkhāyite sarīre methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevati, āpatti pārājikassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one has sexual intercourse with an undecomposed corpse, one commits an offense entailing expulsion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena khāyite sarīre methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevati, āpatti thullaccayassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one has sexual intercourse with a mostly decomposed corpse, one commits a serious offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaṭṭakate mukhe acchupantaṁ aṅgajātaṁ paveseti, āpatti dukkaṭassa—</span></p>
<p class="p3">when one inserts the penis without touching into a wide open mouth, one commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">methunaṁ dhammaṁ paṭisevanto imā tisso āpattiyo āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajanti, sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā, channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhanti, catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ, sattannaṁ samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammanti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to these offenses, to how many of the four kinds of failure do they belong? In how many of the seven classes of offenses are they found? Through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses do they originate? To which of the four kinds of legal issues do they belong? Through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues are they settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āpattiyo catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ dve vipattiyo bhajanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They belong to two kinds of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sīlavipattiṁ, siyā ācāravipattiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be failure in morality; they may be failure in conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ tīhi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are found in three classes of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā pārājikāpattikkhandhena, siyā thullaccayāpattikkhandhena, siyā dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be in the class of offenses entailing expulsion; they may be in the class of serious offenses; they may be in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ ekena samuṭṭhānena samuṭṭhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They originate in one way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhanti, na vācato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ, āpattādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are legal issues arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ tīhi samathehi sammanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are settled in three ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca paṭiññātakaraṇena ca, siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena ca …pe…. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; or they may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karonto kati āpattiyo āpajjati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">For, out of disrespect, defecating, urinating, or spitting in water, how many kinds of offenses does one commit? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karonto ekaṁ āpattiṁ āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One commits one kind of offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkaṭaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anādariyaṁ paṭicca udake uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā kheḷaṁ vā karonto imaṁ ekaṁ āpattiṁ āpajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā āpatti catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ kati vipattiyo bhajati, sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ katihi āpattikkhandhehi saṅgahitā, channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ katihi samuṭṭhānehi samuṭṭhāti, catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ katamaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ, sattannaṁ, samathānaṁ katihi samathehi sammati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it comes to this offense, to how many of the four kinds of failure does it belong? In how many of the seven classes of offenses is it found? Through how many of the six kinds of origins of offenses does it originate? To which of the four kinds of legal issues does it belong? Through how many of the seven principles for settling legal issues is it settled? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā āpatti catunnaṁ vipattīnaṁ ekaṁ vipattiṁ bhajati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It belongs to one kind of failure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ācāravipattiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">failure in conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ āpattikkhandhānaṁ ekena āpattikkhandhena saṅgahitā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is found in one class of offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭāpattikkhandhena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in the class of offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Channaṁ āpattisamuṭṭhānānaṁ ekena samuṭṭhānena samuṭṭhāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It originates in one way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyato ca cittato ca samuṭṭhāti, na vācato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from body and mind, not from speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catunnaṁ adhikaraṇānaṁ, āpattādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a legal issue arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattannaṁ samathānaṁ tīhi samathehi sammati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is settled through three principles: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā sammukhāvinayena ca paṭiññātakaraṇena ca, siyā sammukhāvinayena ca tiṇavatthārakena ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by acting according to what has been admitted; or it may be settled by resolution face-to-face and by covering over as if with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuccayavāro niṭṭhito aṭṭhamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth section that collects together is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime aṭṭha vārā sajjhāyamaggena likhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">These eight sections were written down through the method of recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katthapaññatti kati ca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Where was it laid down, and how many, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vipattisaṅgahena ca;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Failure and being found in; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samuṭṭhānādhikaraṇā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Origin, legal issues, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samatho samuccayena cāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Settling, and with collecting together.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
