<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn140-Dhātuvibhaṅgasutta  - The Analysis of the Elements </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Dhātuvibhaṅgasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">The Analysis of the Elements </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 140  - Middle Discourses 140 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā magadhesu cārikaṃ caramāno yena rājagahaṃ tadavasari; </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was wandering in the Magadhan lands when he arrived at Rājagaha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena bhaggavo kumbhakāro tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhaggavaṃ kumbhakāraṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He went to see Bhaggava the potter, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace te, bhaggava, agaru viharemu āvesane ekarattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Bhaggava, if it is no trouble, I’d like to spend a single night in your workshop.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho me, bhante, garu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s no trouble, sir. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi cettha pabbajito paṭhamaṃ vāsūpagato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there’s a renunciate already staying there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace so anujānāti, viharatha, bhante, yathāsukhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he allows it, sir, you may stay as long as you like.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena pukkusāti nāma kulaputto bhagavantaṃ uddissa saddhāya agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a gentleman named Pukkusāti had gone forth from the lay life to homelessness out of faith in the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tasmiṃ kumbhakārāvesane paṭhamaṃ vāsūpagato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And it was he who had first taken up residence in the workshop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā yenāyasmā pukkusāti tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ pukkusātiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha approached Venerable Pukkusāti and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace te, bhikkhu, agaru viharemu āvesane ekarattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, if it is no trouble, I’d like to spend a single night in the workshop.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Urundaṃ, āvuso, kumbhakārāvesanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The potter’s workshop is spacious, reverend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viharatāyasmā yathāsukhan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please stay as long as you like.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā kumbhakārāvesanaṃ pavisitvā ekamantaṃ tiṇasanthārakaṃ paññāpetvā nisīdi pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha entered the workshop and spread out a grass mat to one side. He sat down cross-legged, with his body straight, and established mindfulness right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bahudeva rattiṃ nisajjāya vītināmesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He spent most of the night sitting meditation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmāpi kho pukkusāti bahudeva rattiṃ nisajjāya vītināmesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and so did Pukkusāti. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pāsādikaṃ kho ayaṃ kulaputto iriyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This gentleman’s conduct is impressive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṃ puccheyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I question him?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ pukkusātiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha said to Pukkusāti, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaṃsi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, uddissa pabbajito? Ko vā te satthā? Kassa vā tvaṃ dhammaṃ rocesī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In whose name have you gone forth, reverend? Who is your Teacher? Whose teaching do you believe in?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthāvuso, samaṇo gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, there is the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kho pana bhagavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has this good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāhaṃ bhagavantaṃ uddissa pabbajito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve gone forth in his name. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca me bhagavā satthā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That Blessed One is my Teacher, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa cāhaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ rocemī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I believe in his teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kahaṃ pana, bhikkhu, etarahi so bhagavā viharati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But mendicant, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthāvuso, uttaresu janapadesu sāvatthi nāma nagaraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the northern lands there is a city called Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha so bhagavā etarahi viharati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Blessed One is now staying, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Diṭṭhapubbo pana te, bhikkhu, so bhagavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But have you ever seen that Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">disvā ca pana jāneyyāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Would you recognize him if you saw him?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho me, āvuso, diṭṭhapubbo so bhagavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, I’ve never seen him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">disvā cāhaṃ na jāneyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and I wouldn’t recognize him if I did.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mamañca khvāyaṃ kulaputto uddissa pabbajito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This gentleman has gone forth in my name. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnassāhaṃ dhammaṃ deseyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t I teach him the Dhamma?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ pukkusātiṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha said to Pukkusāti, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dhammaṃ te, bhikkhu, desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, I shall teach you the Dhamma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho āyasmā pukkusāti bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” replied Pukkusāti. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Cha dhāturo ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso cha phassāyatano aṭṭhārasa manopavicāro caturādhiṭṭhāno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘This person has six elements, six fields of contact, and eighteen mental preoccupations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha ṭhitaṃ maññassavā nappavattanti, maññassave kho pana nappavattamāne muni santoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have four foundations, standing on which the streams of identification don’t flow. And when the streams of identification don’t flow, they’re called a sage at peace. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññaṃ nappamajjeyya, saccamanurakkheyya, cāgamanubrūheyya, santimeva so sikkheyyā’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t neglect wisdom, preserve truth, foster generosity, and train only for peace.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayamuddeso dhātuvibhaṅgassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the recitation passage for the analysis of the elements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Cha dhāturo ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This person has six elements.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, but why did I say it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayimā, bhikkhu, dhātuyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six elements: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pathavīdhātu, āpodhātu, tejodhātu, vāyodhātu, ākāsadhātu, viññāṇadhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Cha dhāturo ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This person has six elements.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Cha phassāyatano ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This person has six fields of contact.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, but why did I say it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhusamphassāyatanaṃ, sotasamphassāyatanaṃ, ghānasamphassāyatanaṃ, jivhāsamphassāyatanaṃ, kāyasamphassāyatanaṃ, manosamphassāyatanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fields of contact of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Cha phassāyatano ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This person has six fields of contact.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Aṭṭhārasa manopavicāro ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This person has eighteen mental preoccupations.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, but why did I say it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā somanassaṭṭhāniyaṃ rūpaṃ upavicarati, domanassaṭṭhāniyaṃ rūpaṃ upavicarati, upekkhāṭṭhāniyaṃ rūpaṃ upavicarati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing a sight with the eye, one is preoccupied with a sight that’s a basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sotena saddaṃ sutvā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hearing a sound with the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smelling an odor with the nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tasting a flavor with the tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling a touch with the body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya somanassaṭṭhāniyaṃ dhammaṃ upavicarati, domanassaṭṭhāniyaṃ dhammaṃ upavicarati, upekkhāṭṭhāniyaṃ dhammaṃ upavicarati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Becoming conscious of a thought with the mind, one is preoccupied with a thought that’s a basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti cha somanassupavicārā, cha domanassupavicārā, cha upekkhupavicārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So there are six preoccupations with happiness, six preoccupations with sadness, and six preoccupations with equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Aṭṭhārasa manopavicāro ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This person has eighteen mental preoccupations.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Caturādhiṭṭhāno ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This person has four foundations.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, but why did I say it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññādhiṭṭhāno, saccādhiṭṭhāno, cāgādhiṭṭhāno, upasamādhiṭṭhāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The foundations of wisdom, truth, generosity, and peace. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Caturādhiṭṭhāno ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This person has four foundations.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Paññaṃ nappamajjeyya, saccamanurakkheyya, cāgamanubrūheyya, santimeva so sikkheyyā’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Don’t neglect wisdom, preserve truth, foster generosity, and train only for peace.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, but why did I say it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhu, paññaṃ nappamajjati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one not neglect wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayimā, bhikkhu, dhātuyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these six elements: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pathavīdhātu, āpodhātu, tejodhātu, vāyodhātu, ākāsadhātu, viññāṇadhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, pathavīdhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the earth element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pathavīdhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The earth element may be interior or exterior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā pathavīdhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the interior earth element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ kakkhaḷaṃ kharigataṃ upādinnaṃ, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Anything hard, solid, and organic that’s internal, pertaining to an individual. This includes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kesā lomā nakhā dantā taco maṃsaṃ nhāru aṭṭhi aṭṭhimiñjaṃ vakkaṃ hadayaṃ yakanaṃ kilomakaṃ pihakaṃ papphāsaṃ antaṃ antaguṇaṃ udariyaṃ karīsaṃ, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ kakkhaḷaṃ kharigataṃ upādinnaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, or anything else hard, solid, and organic that’s internal, pertaining to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā pathavīdhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the interior earth element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā pathavīdhātu yā ca bāhirā pathavīdhātu pathavīdhāturevesā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The interior earth element and the exterior earth element are just the earth element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ netaṃ mama nesohamasmi na meso attā’ti—evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā pathavīdhātuyā nibbindati, pathavīdhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly see with right understanding, you reject the earth element, detaching the mind from the earth element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, āpodhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the water element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpodhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The water element may be interior or exterior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā āpodhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the interior water element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ āpo āpogataṃ upādinnaṃ seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Anything that’s water, watery, and organic that’s internal, pertaining to an individual. This includes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pittaṃ semhaṃ pubbo lohitaṃ sedo medo assu vasā kheḷo siṅghāṇikā lasikā muttaṃ, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ āpo āpogataṃ upādinnaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine, or anything else that’s water, watery, and organic that’s internal, pertaining to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā āpodhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the interior water element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā āpodhātu yā ca bāhirā āpodhātu āpodhāturevesā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The interior water element and the exterior water element are just the water element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti—evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā āpodhātuyā nibbindati, āpodhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly see with right understanding, you reject the water element, detaching the mind from the water element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, tejodhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fire element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tejodhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fire element may be interior or exterior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā tejodhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the interior fire element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ tejo tejogataṃ upādinnaṃ, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Anything that’s fire, fiery, and organic that’s internal, pertaining to an individual. This includes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena ca santappati, yena ca jīrīyati, yena ca pariḍayhati, yena ca asitapītakhāyitasāyitaṃ sammā pariṇāmaṃ gacchati, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ tejo tejogataṃ upādinnaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">that which warms, that which ages, that which heats you up when feverish, that which properly digests food and drink, or anything else that’s fire, fiery, and organic that’s internal, pertaining to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā tejodhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the interior fire element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā tejodhātu yā ca bāhirā tejodhātu tejodhāturevesā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The interior fire element and the exterior fire element are just the fire element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti—evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā tejodhātuyā nibbindati, tejodhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly see with right understanding, you reject the fire element, detaching the mind from the fire element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, vāyodhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the air element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāyodhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The air element may be interior or exterior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā vāyodhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the interior air element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ vāyo vāyogataṃ upādinnaṃ, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Anything that’s air, airy, and organic that’s internal, pertaining to an individual. This includes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddhaṅgamā vātā adhogamā vātā kucchisayā vātā koṭṭhāsayā vātā aṅgamaṅgānusārino vātā assāso passāso iti, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ vāyo vāyogataṃ upādinnaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">winds that go up or down, winds in the belly or the bowels, winds that flow through the limbs, in-breaths and out-breaths, or anything else that’s air, airy, and organic that’s internal, pertaining to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā vāyodhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the interior air element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā vāyodhātu yā ca bāhirā vāyodhātu vāyodhāturevesā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The interior air element and the exterior air element are just the air element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti—evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā vāyodhātuyā nibbindati, vāyodhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly see with right understanding, you reject the air element, detaching the mind from the air element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ākāsadhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the space element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākāsadhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The space element may be interior or exterior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā ākāsadhātu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the interior space element? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ ākāsaṃ ākāsagataṃ upādinnaṃ, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Anything that’s space, spacious, and organic that’s internal, pertaining to an individual. This includes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṇṇacchiddaṃ nāsacchiddaṃ mukhadvāraṃ yena ca asitapītakhāyitasāyitaṃ ajjhoharati, yattha ca asitapītakhāyitasāyitaṃ santiṭṭhati, yena ca asitapītakhāyitasāyitaṃ adhobhāgaṃ nikkhamati, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ ākāsaṃ ākāsagataṃ aghaṃ aghagataṃ vivaraṃ vivaragataṃ asamphuṭṭhaṃ maṃsalohitehi upādinnaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the ear canals, nostrils, and mouth; and the space for swallowing what is eaten and drunk, the space where it stays, and the space for excreting it from the nether regions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā ākāsadhātu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the interior space element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā ākāsadhātu yā ca bāhirā ākāsadhātu ākāsadhāturevesā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The interior space element and the exterior space element are just the space element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti—evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā ākāsadhātuyā nibbindati, ākāsadhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you truly see with right understanding, you reject the space element, detaching the mind from the space element. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athāparaṃ viññāṇaṃyeva avasissati parisuddhaṃ pariyodātaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There remains only consciousness, pure and bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena ca viññāṇena kiṃ vijānāti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does that consciousness know? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sukhan’tipi vijānāti, ‘dukkhan’tipi vijānāti, ‘adukkhamasukhan’tipi vijānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It knows ‘pleasure’ and ‘pain’ and ‘neutral’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘sukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they feel a pleasant feeling, they know: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā sukhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know: ‘With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as pleasant, the corresponding pleasant feeling ceases and stops.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they feel a painful feeling, they know: ‘I feel a painful feeling.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tasseva dukkhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ dukkhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā dukkhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know: ‘With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as painful, the corresponding painful feeling ceases and stops.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So adukkhamasukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘adukkhamasukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they feel a neutral feeling, they know: ‘I feel a neutral feeling.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tasseva adukkhamasukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā adukkhamasukhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know: ‘With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling ceases and stops.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, dvinnaṃ kaṭṭhānaṃ saṅghaṭṭā samodhānā usmā jāyati, tejo abhinibbattati, tesaṃyeva dvinnaṃ kaṭṭhānaṃ nānābhāvā vinikkhepā yā tajjā usmā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any corresponding heat ceases and stops. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhu, sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘sukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā sukhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tasseva dukkhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ dukkhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā dukkhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So adukkhamasukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘adukkhamasukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Tasseva adukkhamasukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā adukkhamasukhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know: ‘With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling ceases and stops.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athāparaṃ upekkhāyeva avasissati parisuddhā pariyodātā mudu ca kammaññā ca pabhassarā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There remains only equanimity, pure, bright, pliable, workable, and radiant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, dakkho suvaṇṇakāro vā suvaṇṇakārantevāsī vā ukkaṃ bandheyya, ukkaṃ bandhitvā ukkāmukhaṃ ālimpeyya, ukkāmukhaṃ ālimpetvā saṇḍāsena jātarūpaṃ gahetvā ukkāmukhe pakkhipeyya, tamenaṃ kālena kālaṃ abhidhameyya, kālena kālaṃ udakena paripphoseyya, kālena kālaṃ ajjhupekkheyya, taṃ hoti jātarūpaṃ sudhantaṃ niddhantaṃ nīhaṭaṃ ninnītakasāvaṃ mudu ca kammaññañca pabhassarañca, yassā yassā ca piḷandhanavikatiyā ākaṅkhati—yadi paṭṭikāya yadi kuṇḍalāya yadi gīveyyakāya yadi suvaṇṇamālāya tañcassa atthaṃ anubhoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like when a goldsmith or a goldsmith’s apprentice prepares a forge, fires the crucible, picks up some gold with tongs and puts it in the crucible. From time to time they fan it, from time to time they sprinkle water on it, and from time to time they just watch over it. That gold becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and is ready to be worked. Then the goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhu, athāparaṃ upekkhāyeva avasissati parisuddhā pariyodātā mudu ca kammaññā ca pabhassarā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, there remains only equanimity, pure, bright, pliable, workable, and radiant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of infinite space, my mind would develop accordingly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me ayaṃ upekkhā tannissitā tadupādānā ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it, would remain for a very long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of infinite consciousness, my mind would develop accordingly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me ayaṃ upekkhā tannissitā tadupādānā ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it, would remain for a very long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of nothingness, my mind would develop accordingly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me ayaṃ upekkhā tannissitā tadupādānā ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it, would remain for a very long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, my mind would develop accordingly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me ayaṃ upekkhā tannissitā tadupādānā ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it, would remain for a very long time.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pajānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of infinite space, my mind would develop accordingly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhatametaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that is conditioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of infinite consciousness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhatametaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nothingness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhatametaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">neither perception nor non-perception, my mind would develop accordingly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhatametan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that is conditioned.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So neva taṃ abhisaṅkharoti, na abhisañcetayati bhavāya vā vibhavāya vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neither make a choice nor form an intention to continue existence or to end existence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anabhisaṅkharonto anabhisañcetayanto bhavāya vā vibhavāya vā na kiñci loke upādiyati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of this, they don’t grasp at anything in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupādiyaṃ na paritassati, aparitassaṃ paccattaṃyeva parinibbāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, ‘sā aniccā’ti pajānāti, ‘anajjhositā’ti pajānāti, ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dukkhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, ‘sā aniccā’ti pajānāti, ‘anajjhositā’ti pajānāti, ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a painful feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adukkhamasukhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, ‘sā aniccā’ti pajānāti, ‘anajjhositā’ti pajānāti, ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a neutral feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sukhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, visaṃyutto naṃ vedeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, visaṃyutto naṃ vedeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a painful feeling, they feel it detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adukkhamasukhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, visaṃyutto naṃ vedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it detached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body approaching.’ Feeling the end of life approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life approaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, telañca paṭicca vaṭṭiñca paṭicca telappadīpo jhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasseva telassa ca vaṭṭiyā ca pariyādānā aññassa ca anupahārā anāhāro nibbāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the oil and the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to lack of fuel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva kho, bhikkhu, kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body approaching.’ Feeling the end of life approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life approaching.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā evaṃ samannāgato bhikkhu iminā paramena paññādhiṭṭhānena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate foundation of wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā hi, bhikkhu, paramā ariyā paññā yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For this is the ultimate noble wisdom, namely, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbadukkhakkhaye ñāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the knowledge of the ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sā vimutti sacce ṭhitā akuppā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their freedom, being founded on truth, is unshakable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi, bhikkhu, musā yaṃ mosadhammaṃ, taṃ saccaṃ yaṃ amosadhammaṃ nibbānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For that which is false has a deceptive nature, while that which is true has an undeceptive nature—extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā evaṃ samannāgato bhikkhu iminā paramena saccādhiṭṭhānena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate foundation of truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañhi, bhikkhu, paramaṃ ariyasaccaṃ yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For this is the ultimate noble truth, namely, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amosadhammaṃ nibbānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that which has an undeceptive nature—extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno upadhī honti samattā samādinnā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In their ignorance, they used to acquire attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tyāssa pahīnā honti ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those have been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so they are unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā evaṃ samannāgato bhikkhu iminā paramena cāgādhiṭṭhānena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate foundation of generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso hi, bhikkhu, paramo ariyo cāgo yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For this is the ultimate noble generosity, namely, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbūpadhipaṭinissaggo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">letting go of all attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno abhijjhā hoti chando sārāgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In their ignorance, they used to be covetous, full of desire and lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svāssa pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That has been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno āghāto hoti byāpādo sampadoso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In their ignorance, they used to be contemptuous, full of ill will and malevolence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svāssa pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That has been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno avijjā hoti sammoho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In their ignorance, they used to be ignorant, full of delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svāssa pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That has been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so it’s unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā evaṃ samannāgato bhikkhu iminā paramena upasamādhiṭṭhānena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate foundation of peace. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso hi, bhikkhu, paramo ariyo upasamo yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For this is the ultimate noble peace, namely, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāgadosamohānaṃ upasamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the pacification of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Paññaṃ nappamajjeyya, saccamanurakkheyya, cāgamanubrūheyya, santimeva so sikkheyyā’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Don’t neglect wisdom, preserve truth, foster generosity, and train only for peace.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yattha ṭhitaṃ maññassavā nappavattanti, maññassave kho pana nappavattamāne muni santoti vuccatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They have four foundations, standing on which the streams of identification don’t flow. And when the streams of identification don’t flow, they’re called a sage at peace.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, but why did I say it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Asmī’ti, bhikkhu, maññitametaṃ, ‘ayamahamasmī’ti maññitametaṃ, ‘bhavissan’ti maññitametaṃ, ‘na bhavissan’ti maññitametaṃ, ‘rūpī bhavissan’ti maññitametaṃ, ‘arūpī bhavissan’ti maññitametaṃ, ‘saññī bhavissan’ti maññitametaṃ, ‘asaññī bhavissan’ti maññitametaṃ, ‘nevasaññīnāsaññī bhavissan’ti maññitametaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are all forms of identifying: ‘I am’, ‘I am this’, ‘I will be’, ‘I will not be’, ‘I will have form’, ‘I will be formless’, ‘I will be percipient’, ‘I will be non-percipient’, ‘I will be neither percipient nor non-percipient.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maññitaṃ, bhikkhu, rogo maññitaṃ gaṇḍo maññitaṃ sallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Identification is a disease, a boil, a dart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbamaññitānaṃ tveva, bhikkhu, samatikkamā muni santoti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having gone beyond all identification, one is called a sage at peace. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muni kho pana, bhikkhu, santo na jāyati, na jīyati, na mīyati, na kuppati, na piheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sage at peace is not reborn, does not grow old, and does not die. They are not shaken, and do not yearn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhissa, bhikkhu, natthi yena jāyetha, ajāyamāno kiṃ jīyissati, ajīyamāno kiṃ mīyissati, amīyamāno kiṃ kuppissati, akuppamāno kissa pihessati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">For they have nothing which would cause them to be reborn. Not being reborn, how could they grow old? Not growing old, how could they die? Not dying, how could they be shaken? Not shaking, for what could they yearn? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yattha ṭhitaṃ maññassavā nappavattanti, maññassave kho pana nappavattamāne muni santoti vuccatī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They have four foundations, standing on which the streams of identification don’t flow. And when the streams of identification don’t flow, they’re called a sage at peace.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imaṃ kho me tvaṃ, bhikkhu, saṃkhittena chadhātuvibhaṅgaṃ dhārehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicant, you should remember this brief analysis of the six elements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pukkusāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Pukkusāti thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“satthā kira me anuppatto, sugato kira me anuppatto, sammāsambuddho kira me anuppatto”ti uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ cīvaraṃ katvā bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It seems the Teacher has come to me! The Holy One has come to me! The fully awakened Buddha has come to me!” He got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, bowed with his head to the Buddha’s feet, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“accayo maṃ, bhante, accagamā yathābālaṃ yathāmūḷhaṃ yathāakusalaṃ, yohaṃ bhagavantaṃ āvusovādena samudācaritabbaṃ amaññissaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to presume to address the Buddha as ‘reverend’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa me, bhante, bhagavā accayaṃ accayato paṭiggaṇhātu āyatiṃ saṃvarāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha tvaṃ, bhikkhu, accayo accagamā yathābālaṃ yathāmūḷhaṃ yathāakusalaṃ, yaṃ maṃ tvaṃ āvusovādena samudācaritabbaṃ amaññittha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, mendicant, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of you to act in that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ paṭikarosi, taṃ te mayaṃ paṭiggaṇhāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuddhihesā, bhikkhu, ariyassa vinaye yo accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ paṭikaroti, āyatiṃ saṃvaraṃ āpajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For it is growth in the training of the noble one to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Labheyyāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavato santike upasampadan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paripuṇṇaṃ pana te, bhikkhu, pattacīvaran”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But mendicant, are your bowl and robes complete?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho me, bhante, paripuṇṇaṃ pattacīvaran”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir, they are not.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, bhikkhu, tathāgatā aparipuṇṇapattacīvaraṃ upasampādentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Realized Ones do not ordain those whose bowl and robes are incomplete.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pukkusāti bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pattacīvarapariyesanaṃ pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then Venerable Pukkusāti approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmantaṃ pukkusātiṃ pattacīvarapariyesanaṃ carantaṃ vibbhantā gāvī jīvitā voropesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But while he was wandering in search of a bowl and robes, a stray cow took his life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo so, bhante, pukkusāti nāma kulaputto bhagavatā saṃkhittena ovādena ovadito so kālaṅkato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, the gentleman named Pukkusāti, who was advised in brief by the Buddha, has passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kā gati, ko abhisamparāyo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Where has he been reborn in his next life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paṇḍito, bhikkhave, pukkusāti kulaputto paccapādi dhammassānudhammaṃ, na ca maṃ dhammādhikaraṇaṃ vihesesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, Pukkusāti was astute. He practiced in line with the teachings, and did not trouble me about the teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pukkusāti, bhikkhave, kulaputto pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko tattha parinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters, he’s been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhātuvibhaṅgasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
