<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn142-Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅgasutta  - The Analysis of Religious Donations </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅgasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">The Analysis of Religious Donations </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 142  - Middle Discourses 142 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ nigrodhārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahāpajāpati gotamī navaṃ dussayugaṃ ādāya yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho mahāpajāpati gotamī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī approached the Buddha bringing a new pair of garments. She bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṃ me, bhante, navaṃ dussayugaṃ bhagavantaṃ uddissa sāmaṃ kantaṃ sāmaṃ vāyitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have spun and woven this new pair of garments specially for the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ me, bhante, bhagavā paṭiggaṇhātu anukampaṃ upādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Buddha please accept this from me out of compassion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, bhagavā mahāpajāpatiṃ gotamiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When she said this, the Buddha said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṃghe, gotami, dehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give it to the Saṅgha, Gotamī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃghe te dinne ahañceva pūjito bhavissāmi saṃgho cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you give to the Saṅgha, both the Saṅgha and I will be honored.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho mahāpajāpati gotamī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṃ me, bhante, navaṃ dussayugaṃ bhagavantaṃ uddissa sāmaṃ kantaṃ sāmaṃ vāyitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ me, bhante, bhagavā paṭiggaṇhātu anukampaṃ upādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā mahāpajāpatiṃ gotamiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅghe, gotami, dehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe te dinne ahañceva pūjito bhavissāmi saṅgho cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho mahāpajāpati gotamī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a third time, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṃ me, bhante, navaṃ dussayugaṃ bhagavantaṃ uddissa sāmaṃ kantaṃ sāmaṃ vāyitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have spun and woven this new pair of garments specially for the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ me, bhante, bhagavā paṭiggaṇhātu anukampaṃ upādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Buddha please accept this from me out of compassion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho bhagavā mahāpajāpatiṃ gotamiṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time, the Buddha said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅghe, gotami, dehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give it to the Saṅgha, Gotamī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghe te dinne ahañceva pūjito bhavissāmi saṅgho cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you give to the Saṅgha, both the Saṅgha and I will be honored.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭiggaṇhātu, bhante, bhagavā mahāpajāpatiyā gotamiyā navaṃ dussayugaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, please accept the new pair of garments from Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahūpakārā, bhante, mahāpajāpati gotamī bhagavato mātucchā āpādikā posikā khīrassa dāyikā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, Mahāpajāpatī was very helpful to the Buddha. As his aunt, she raised him, nurtured him, and gave him her milk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavantaṃ janettiyā kālaṅkatāya thaññaṃ pāyesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha’s birth mother passed away, she nurtured him at her own breast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavāpi, bhante, bahūpakāro mahāpajāpatiyā gotamiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the Buddha has been very helpful to Mahāpajāpatī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavantaṃ, bhante, āgamma mahāpajāpati gotamī buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā, dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā, saṃghaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It is owing to the Buddha that Mahāpajāpatī has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavantaṃ, bhante, āgamma mahāpajāpati gotamī pāṇātipātā paṭiviratā adinnādānā paṭiviratā kāmesumicchācārā paṭiviratā musāvādā paṭiviratā surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭiviratā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s owing to the Buddha that she refrains from killing living creatures, stealing, committing sexual misconduct, lying, and taking alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavantaṃ, bhante, āgamma mahāpajāpati gotamī buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatā, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgatā, saṃghe aveccappasādena samannāgatā ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s owing to the Buddha that she has experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and has the ethics loved by the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavantaṃ, bhante, āgamma mahāpajāpati gotamī dukkhe nikkaṅkhā, dukkhasamudaye nikkaṅkhā, dukkhanirodhe nikkaṅkhā, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya nikkaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s owing to the Buddha that she is free of doubt regarding suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavāpi, bhante, bahūpakāro mahāpajāpatiyā gotamiyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has been very helpful to Mahāpajāpatī.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evametaṃ, ānanda. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s so true, Ānanda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ hānanda, puggalo puggalaṃ āgamma buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gato hoti, dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gato hoti, saṅghaṃ saraṇaṃ gato hoti, imassānanda, puggalassa iminā puggalena na suppatikāraṃ vadāmi, yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone has enabled you to go for refuge, it’s not easy to repay them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhivādanapaccuṭṭhānaañjalikammasāmīcikammacīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānuppadānena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by bowing down to them, rising up for them, greeting them with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette for them; or by providing them with robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ hānanda, puggalo puggalaṃ āgamma pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti, musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti, imassānanda, puggalassa iminā puggalena na suppatikāraṃ vadāmi, yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone has enabled you to refrain from killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, it’s not easy to repay them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhivādanapaccuṭṭhānaañjalikammasāmīcikammacīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānuppadānena. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ hānanda, puggalo puggalaṃ āgamma buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti, dhamme … saṅghe … ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti, imassānanda, puggalassa iminā puggalena na suppatikāraṃ vadāmi, yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone has enabled you to have experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and the ethics loved by the noble ones, it’s not easy to repay them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhivādanapaccuṭṭhānaañjalikammasāmīcikammacīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānuppadānena. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ hānanda, puggalo puggalaṃ āgamma dukkhe nikkaṅkho hoti, dukkhasamudaye nikkaṅkho hoti, dukkhanirodhe nikkaṅkho hoti, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya nikkaṅkho hoti, imassānanda, puggalassa iminā puggalena na suppatikāraṃ vadāmi, yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When someone has enabled you to be free of doubt regarding suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation, it’s not easy to repay them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhivādanapaccuṭṭhānaañjalikammasāmīcikammacīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānuppadānena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by bowing down to them, rising up for them, greeting them with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette for them; or by providing them with robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cuddasa kho panimānanda, pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda, there are these fourteen religious donations to individuals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā cuddasa? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What fourteen? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgate arahante sammāsambuddhe dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ paṭhamā pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paccekasambuddhe dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to a Buddha awakened for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ dutiyā pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatasāvake arahante dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to a perfected one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ tatiyā pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arahattaphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanne dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to a someone practicing to realize the fruit of perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ catutthī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgāmissa dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to a non-returner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ pañcamī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanne dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ chaṭṭhī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the sixth religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakadāgāmissa dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to a once-returner. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ sattamī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakadāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanne dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of once-return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ aṭṭhamī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the eighth religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotāpanne dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to a stream-enterer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ navamī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the ninth religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotāpattiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanne dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ dasamī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the tenth religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bāhirake kāmesu vītarāge dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to someone outside of Buddhism who is free of sensual desire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ ekādasamī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the eleventh religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puthujjanasīlavante dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to an ordinary person who has good ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ dvādasamī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the twelfth religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puthujjanadussīle dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to an ordinary person who has bad ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ terasamī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the thirteenth religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiracchānagate dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to an animal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ cuddasamī pāṭipuggalikā dakkhiṇāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourteenth religious donation to an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrānanda, tiracchānagate dānaṃ datvā sataguṇā dakkhiṇā pāṭikaṅkhitabbā, puthujjanadussīle dānaṃ datvā sahassaguṇā dakkhiṇā pāṭikaṅkhitabbā, puthujjanasīlavante dānaṃ datvā satasahassaguṇā dakkhiṇā pāṭikaṅkhitabbā, bāhirake kāmesu vītarāge dānaṃ datvā koṭisatasahassaguṇā dakkhiṇā pāṭikaṅkhitabbā, sotāpattiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanne dānaṃ datvā asaṅkheyyā appameyyā dakkhiṇā pāṭikaṅkhitabbā, ko pana vādo sotāpanne, ko pana vādo sakadāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanne, ko pana vādo sakadāgāmissa, ko pana vādo anāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanne, ko pana vādo anāgāmissa, ko pana vādo arahattaphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanne, ko pana vādo arahante, ko pana vādo paccekasambuddhe, ko pana vādo tathāgate arahante sammāsambuddhe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, Ānanda, gifts to the following persons may be expected to yield the following returns. To an animal, a hundred times. To an unethical ordinary person, a thousand. To an ethical ordinary person, a hundred thousand. To an outsider free of sensual desire, 10,000,000,000. But a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry may be expected to yield incalculable, immeasurable returns. How much more so a gift to a stream-enterer, someone practicing to realize the fruit of once-return, a once-returner, someone practicing to realize the fruit of non-return, a non-returner, someone practicing to realize the fruit of perfection, a perfected one, or a Buddha awakened for themselves? How much more so a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satta kho panimānanda, saṅghagatā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there are, Ānanda, seven religious donations bestowed on a Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddhappamukhe ubhatosaṅghe dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to the communities of both monks and nuns headed by the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ paṭhamā saṅghagatā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgate parinibbute ubhatosaṅghe dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to the communities of both monks and nuns after the Buddha has finally become extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ dutiyā saṅghagatā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhusaṅghe dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to the Saṅgha of monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ tatiyā saṅghagatā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunisaṅghe dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift to the Saṅgha of nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ catutthī saṅghagatā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ettakā me bhikkhū ca bhikkhuniyo ca saṅghato uddissathā’ti dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift, thinking: ‘Appoint this many monks and nuns for me from the Saṅgha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ pañcamī saṅghagatā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ettakā me bhikkhū saṅghato uddissathā’ti dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift, thinking: ‘Appoint this many monks for me from the Saṅgha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ chaṭṭhī saṅghagatā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the sixth religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ettakā me bhikkhuniyo saṅghato uddissathā’ti dānaṃ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">One gives a gift, thinking: ‘Appoint this many nuns for me from the Saṅgha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ sattamī saṅghagatā dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavissanti kho panānanda, anāgatamaddhānaṃ gotrabhuno kāsāvakaṇṭhā dussīlā pāpadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In times to come there will be members of the spiritual family merely by virtue of wearing ocher cloth around their necks; but they are unethical and of bad character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesu dussīlesu saṅghaṃ uddissa dānaṃ dassanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">People will give gifts to those unethical people in the name of the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadāpāhaṃ, ānanda, saṅghagataṃ dakkhiṇaṃ asaṅkheyyaṃ appameyyaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even then, I say, a religious donation bestowed on the Saṅgha is incalculable and immeasurable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tvevāhaṃ, ānanda, kenaci pariyāyena saṅghagatāya dakkhiṇāya pāṭipuggalikaṃ dānaṃ mahapphalataraṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I say that there is no way a personal offering can be more fruitful than one bestowed on a Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catasso kho imā, ānanda, dakkhiṇā visuddhiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda, there are these four ways of purifying a religious donation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā catasso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthānanda, dakkhiṇā dāyakato visujjhati no paṭiggāhakato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a religious donation that’s purified by the giver, not the recipient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthānanda, dakkhiṇā paṭiggāhakato visujjhati no dāyakato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a religious donation that’s purified by the recipient, not the giver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthānanda, dakkhiṇā neva dāyakato visujjhati no paṭiggāhakato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a religious donation that’s purified by neither the giver nor the recipient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthānanda, dakkhiṇā dāyakato ceva visujjhati paṭiggāhakato ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s a religious donation that’s purified by both the giver and the recipient. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, dakkhiṇā dāyakato visujjhati no paṭiggāhakato? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a religious donation purified by the giver, not the recipient? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, dāyako hoti sīlavā kalyāṇadhammo, paṭiggāhakā honti dussīlā pāpadhammā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when the giver is ethical, of good character, but the recipient is unethical, of bad character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, ānanda, dakkhiṇā dāyakato visujjhati no paṭiggāhakato. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, dakkhiṇā paṭiggāhakato visujjhati no dāyakato? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a religious donation purified by the recipient, not the giver? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, dāyako hoti dussīlo pāpadhammo, paṭiggāhakā honti sīlavanto kalyāṇadhammā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when the giver is unethical, of bad character, but the recipient is ethical, of good character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, ānanda, dakkhiṇā paṭiggāhakato visujjhati no dāyakato. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, dakkhiṇā neva dāyakato visujjhati no paṭiggāhakato? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a religious donation purified by neither the giver nor the recipient? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, dāyako ca hoti dussīlo pāpadhammo, paṭiggāhakā ca honti dussīlā pāpadhammā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when both the giver and the recipient are unethical, of bad character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, ānanda, dakkhiṇā neva dāyakato visujjhati no paṭiggāhakato. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, dakkhiṇā dāyakato ceva visujjhati paṭiggāhakato ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a religious donation purified by both the giver and the recipient? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, dāyako ca hoti sīlavā kalyāṇadhammo, paṭiggāhakā ca honti sīlavanto kalyāṇadhammā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when both the giver and the recipient are ethical, of good character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, ānanda, dakkhiṇā dāyakato ceva visujjhati paṭiggāhakato ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, ānanda, catasso dakkhiṇā visuddhiyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four ways of purifying a religious donation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo sīlavā dussīlesu dadāti dānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When an ethical person with trusting heart </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammena laddhaṃ supasannacitto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">gives a proper gift to unethical persons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhisaddahaṃ kammaphalaṃ uḷāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">trusting in the ample fruit of deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā dakkhiṇā dāyakato visujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that offering is purified by the giver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dussīlo sīlavantesu dadāti dānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an unethical and untrusting person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammena laddhaṃ appasannacitto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">gives an improper gift to ethical persons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anabhisaddahaṃ kammaphalaṃ uḷāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not trusting in the ample fruit of deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā dakkhiṇā paṭiggāhakato visujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that offering is purified by the receivers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo dussīlo dussīlesu dadāti dānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an unethical and untrusting person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammena laddhaṃ appasannacitto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">gives an improper gift to unethical persons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anabhisaddahaṃ kammaphalaṃ uḷāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not trusting in the ample fruit of deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na taṃ dānaṃ vipulapphalanti brūmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I declare that gift is not very fruitful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sīlavā sīlavantesu dadāti dānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an ethical person with trusting heart </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammena laddhaṃ supasannacitto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">gives a proper gift to ethical persons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhisaddahaṃ kammaphalaṃ uḷāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">trusting in the ample fruit of deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ ve dānaṃ vipulapphalanti brūmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I declare that gift is abundantly fruitful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo vītarāgo vītarāgesu dadāti dānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when a passionless one gives to the passionless </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammena laddhaṃ supasannacitto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a proper gift with trusting heart, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhisaddahaṃ kammaphalaṃ uḷāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">trusting in the ample fruit of deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ ve dānaṃ āmisadānānamaggan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s truly the best of material gifts.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅgasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ dvādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vibhaṅgavaggo niṭṭhito catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaddekānandakaccāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lomasakaṅgiyāsubho; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahākammasaḷāyatanavibhaṅgā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddesaaraṇā dhātu saccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅgasuttanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
