<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np2_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2. Udosita(dutiyakathina)sikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">2. The training rule on storehouses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū bhikkhūnaṁ hatthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā santaruttarena janapadacārikaṁ pakkamanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks stored one of their robes with other monks and then left to wander the country in a sarong and an upper robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni cīvarāni ciraṁ nikkhittāni kaṇṇakitāni honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because they were stored for a long time, the robes became moldy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni bhikkhū otāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks put them out in the sun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā ānando senāsanacārikaṁ āhiṇḍanto te bhikkhū tāni cīvarāni otāpente.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, while walking about the dwellings, Venerable Ānanda saw the monks sunning those robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna yena te bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te bhikkhū etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He asked them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kassimāni, āvuso, cīvarāni kaṇṇakitānī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whose moldy robes are these?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmato ānandassa etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ānando ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Ānanda complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū bhikkhūnaṁ hatthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā santaruttarena janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those monks store a robe with other monks and then leave to wander the country in a sarong and an upper robe?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando te bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, Venerable Ānanda told the Buddha. Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū bhikkhūnaṁ hatthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā santaruttarena janapadacārikaṁ pakkamantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that there are monks who do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā bhikkhūnaṁ hatthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā santaruttarena janapadacārikaṁ pakkamissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Niṭṭhitacīvarasmiṁ bhikkhunā ubbhatasmiṁ kathine ekarattampi ce bhikkhu ticīvarena vippavaseyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When his robe is finished and the robe-making season has ended, if a monk stays apart from his three robes even for a single day, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu kosambiyaṁ gilāno hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain monk at Kosambī was sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātakā tassa bhikkhuno santike dūtaṁ pāhesuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">His relatives sent him a message, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgacchatu bhadanto, mayaṁ, upaṭṭhahissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Venerable, we’ll nurse you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūpi evamāhaṁsu—“gacchāvuso, ñātakā taṁ upaṭṭhahissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks urged him to go, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatāvuso, sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha has laid down a training rule </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na ticīvarena vippavasitabban’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that you can’t be apart from your three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañcamhi gilāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now because I’m sick, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sakkomi ticīvaraṁ ādāya pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m unable to travel with my three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṁ gamissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I can’t go.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānassa bhikkhuno ticīvarena avippavāsasammutiṁ dātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to give permission to a sick monk to stay apart from his three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And it should be given like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena gilānena bhikkhunā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha, the sick monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior monks. He should then squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṁ, bhante, gilāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, I’m sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sakkomi ticīvaraṁ ādāya pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m unable to travel with my three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṁ, bhante, saṅghaṁ ticīvarena avippavāsasammutiṁ yācāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I ask the Sangha for permission to stay apart from my three robes.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he should ask a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable monk should then inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu gilāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk so-and-so is sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sakkoti ticīvaraṁ ādāya pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is unable to travel with his three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saṅghaṁ ticīvarena avippavāsasammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is asking the Sangha for permission to stay apart from his three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmassa bhikkhuno ticīvarena avippavāsasammutiṁ dadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should give permission to monk so-and-so to stay apart from his three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu gilāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk so-and-so is sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sakkoti ticīvaraṁ ādāya pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is unable to travel with his three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saṅghaṁ ticīvarena avippavāsasammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is asking the Sangha for permission to stay apart from his three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmassa bhikkhuno ticīvarena avippavāsasammutiṁ deti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha gives permission to monk so-and-so to stay apart from his three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno ticīvarena avippavāsasammutiyā dānaṁ, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of giving permission to monk so-and-so to stay apart from his three robes should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dinnā saṅghena itthannāmassa bhikkhuno ticīvarena avippavāsasammuti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has given permission to monk so-and-so to stay apart from his three robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametaṁ dhārayāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will remember it thus.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Niṭṭhitacīvarasmiṁ bhikkhunā ubbhatasmiṁ kathine ekarattampi ce bhikkhu ticīvarena vippavaseyya, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When his robe is finished and the robe-making season has ended, if a monk stays apart from his three robes even for a single day, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niṭṭhitacīvarasminti</span></p>
<p class="p3">When his robe is finished: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuno cīvaraṁ kataṁ vā hoti naṭṭhaṁ vā vinaṭṭhaṁ vā daḍḍhaṁ vā cīvarāsā vā upacchinnā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk has made a robe; or the robe-cloth has been lost, ruined, or burnt; or he has abandoned his expectation of receiving further robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhatasmiṁ kathineti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-making season has ended: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhannaṁ mātikānaṁ aññatarāya mātikāya ubbhataṁ hoti, saṅghena vā antarā ubbhataṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it has ended according to one of the eight summaries or the Sangha has ended it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekarattampi ce bhikkhu ticīvarena vippavaseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk stays apart from his three robes even for a single day: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghāṭiyā vā uttarāsaṅgena vā antaravāsakena vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from the outer robe, the upper robe, or the sarong. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra bhikkhusammutiyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except if the monks have agreed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā bhikkhusammutiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless the monks have agreed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyaṁ hotīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing relinquishment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saha aruṇuggamanā nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it becomes subject to relinquishment at dawn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ rattivippavutthaṁ aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā nissaggiyaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe, which I have stayed apart from for one day without the agreement of the monks, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāmo ekūpacāro nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An inhabited area may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nivesanaṁ ekūpacāraṁ nānūpacāraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a house may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udosito ekūpacāro nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a storehouse may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭo ekūpacāro nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a watchtower may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māḷo ekūpacāro nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a stilt house may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāsādo ekūpacāro nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hammiyaṁ ekūpacāraṁ nānūpacāraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāvā ekūpacārā nānūpacārā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a boat may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattho ekūpacāro nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a caravan may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettaṁ ekūpacāraṁ nānūpacāraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a field may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhaññakaraṇaṁ ekūpacāraṁ nānūpacāraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a threshing floor may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmo ekūpacāro nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monastery may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihāro ekūpacāro nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a dwelling may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rukkhamūlaṁ ekūpacāraṁ nānūpacāraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the foot of a tree may have a single vicinity or many; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhokāso ekūpacāro nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">out in the open may have a single vicinity or many. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāmo ekūpacāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">“An inhabited area with a single vicinity” refers to the following. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekakulassa gāmo hoti parikkhitto ca. Antogāme cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antogāme vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed inhabited area belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept within the inhabited area, one must stay within the inhabited area. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhitto hoti, yasmiṁ ghare cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ ghare vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed inhabited area belonging to one clan: one must stay in the house where the robe is kept, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa gāmo hoti parikkhitto ca. Yasmiṁ ghare cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ ghare vatthabbaṁ sabhāye vā dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed inhabited area belonging to many clans: if the robe is kept in a house, one must stay in that house, in the public meeting hall, or at the gateway to the inhabited area, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the public meeting hall or the gateway. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabhāyaṁ gacchantena hatthapāse cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā sabhāye vā vatthabbaṁ dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If one puts aside the robe within arm’s reach while going to the public meeting hall, one must stay in the public meeting hall, or at the gateway to the inhabited area, or not go beyond arm’s reach of either. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabhāye cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā sabhāye vā vatthabbaṁ dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the robe is kept in the public meeting hall, one must stay in the public meeting hall, or at the gateway to the inhabited area, or not go beyond arm’s reach of either. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhitto hoti, yasmiṁ ghare cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ ghare vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed inhabited area belonging to many clans: one must stay in the house where the robe is kept, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa nivesanaṁ hoti parikkhittañca, nānāgabbhā nānāovarakā. Antonivesane cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antonivesane vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed house belonging to one clan and having many rooms: if the robe is kept in the house, one must stay within the house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittaṁ hoti, yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed house belonging to one clan and having many rooms: one must stay in the room where the robe is kept, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the room. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa nivesanaṁ hoti parikkhittañca, nānāgabbhā nānāovarakā. Yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed house belonging to many clans and having many rooms: if the robe is kept in a room, one must stay in that room, or at the main entrance, or not go beyond arm’s reach of either. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittaṁ hoti, yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed house belonging to many clans and having many rooms: one must stay in the room where the robe is kept, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the room. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa udosito hoti parikkhitto ca, nānāgabbhā nānāovarakā. Antoudosite cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antoudosite vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed storehouse belonging to one clan and having many rooms: if the robe is kept in the building, one must stay within the building. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhitto hoti, yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed storehouse belonging to one clan and having many rooms: one must stay in the room where the robe is kept, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the room. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa udosito hoti parikkhitto ca, nānāgabbhā nānāovarakā. Yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed storehouse belonging to many clans and having many rooms: if the robe is kept in a room, one must stay in that room, or at the main entrance, or not go beyond arm’s reach of either. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhitto hoti, yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed storehouse belonging to many clans and having many rooms: one must stay in the room where the robe is kept, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the room. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa aṭṭo hoti, antoaṭṭe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antoaṭṭe vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A watchtower belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept in the watchtower, one must stay within the watchtower. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa aṭṭo hoti, nānāgabbhā nānāovarakā. Yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A watchtower belonging to many clans and having many rooms: one must stay in the room where the robe is kept, or at the main entrance, or not go beyond arm’s reach of either. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa māḷo hoti, antomāḷe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antomāḷe vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A stilt house belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept in the stilt house, one must stay within the stilt house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa māḷo hoti nānāgabbhā nānāovarakā, yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A stilt house belonging to many clans and having many rooms: one must stay in the room where the robe is kept, or at the main entrance, or not go beyond arm’s reach of either. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa pāsādo hoti, antopāsāde cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antopāsāde vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa pāsādo hoti, nānāgabbhā nānāovarakā. Yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa hammiyaṁ hoti, antohammiye cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antohammiye vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa hammiyaṁ hoti, nānāgabbhā nānāovarakā. Yasmiṁ gabbhe cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ gabbhe vatthabbaṁ dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa nāvā hoti. Antonāvāya cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antonāvāya vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A boat belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept on the boat, one must stay on the boat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa nāvā hoti nānāgabbhā nānāovarakā. Yasmiṁ ovarake cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ ovarake vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A boat belonging to many clans and having many rooms: one must stay in the room where the robe is kept, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the room. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa sattho hoti. Satthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā purato vā pacchato vā sattabbhantarā na vijahitabbā, passato abbhantaraṁ na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A caravan belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept within the caravan, one must not go further than 80 meters in front of or behind the caravan, and no further than 11 meters from either side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa sattho hoti, satthe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā hatthapāsā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A caravan belonging to many clans: if the robe is kept within the caravan, one must not go beyond arm’s reach of the caravan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa khettaṁ hoti parikkhittañca. Antokhette cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antokhette vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed field belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept within the field, one must stay within that field. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittaṁ hoti, hatthapāsā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed field belonging to one clan: one must not go beyond arm’s reach of the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa khettaṁ hoti parikkhittañca. Antokhette cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā dvāramūle vā vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed field belonging to many clans: if the robe is kept within the field, one must stay at the entrance to the field, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the entrance or the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittaṁ hoti, hatthapāsā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed field belonging to many clans: one must not go beyond arm’s reach of the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa dhaññakaraṇaṁ hoti parikkhittañca. Antodhaññakaraṇe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antodhaññakaraṇe vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed threshing floor belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept on the threshing floor, one must stay on that threshing floor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittaṁ hoti, hatthapāsā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed threshing floor belonging to one clan: one must not go beyond arm’s reach of the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa dhaññakaraṇaṁ hoti parikkhittañca. Antodhaññakaraṇe cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā dvāramūle vā vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed threshing floor belonging to many clans: if the robe is kept on the threshing floor, one must stay at the entrance to the threshing floor, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the entrance or the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittaṁ hoti, hatthapāsā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed threshing floor belonging to many clans: one must not go beyond arm’s reach of the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa ārāmo hoti parikkhitto ca. Antoārāme cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antoārāme vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed monastery belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept within the monastery, one must stay within that monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhitto hoti, hatthapāsā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed monastery belonging to one clan: one must not go beyond arm’s reach of the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa ārāmo hoti parikkhitto ca. Antoārāme cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā dvāramūle vā vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed monastery belonging to many clans: if the robe is kept within the monastery, one must stay at the entrance to the monastery, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the entrance or the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhitto hoti, hatthapāsā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed monastery belonging to many clans: one must not go beyond arm’s reach of the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa vihāro hoti parikkhitto ca. Antovihāre cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antovihāre vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed dwelling belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept within the dwelling, one must stay within that dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhitto hoti, yasmiṁ vihāre cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ vihāre vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed dwelling belonging to one clan: one must stay in the dwelling where the robe is kept, or not go beyond arm’s reach of that dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa vihāro hoti parikkhitto ca. Yasmiṁ vihāre cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ vihāre vatthabbaṁ dvāramūle vā, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An enclosed dwelling belonging to many clans: one must stay in the dwelling where the robe is kept, or at the main entrance to the dwelling, or not go beyond arm’s reach of either. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhitto hoti, yasmiṁ vihāre cīvaraṁ nikkhittaṁ hoti tasmiṁ vihāre vatthabbaṁ, hatthapāsā vā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unenclosed dwelling belonging to many clans: one must stay in the dwelling where the robe is kept, or not go beyond arm’s reach of the dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekakulassa rukkhamūlaṁ hoti, yaṁ majjhanhike kāle samantā chāyā pharati, antochāyāya cīvaraṁ nikkhipitvā antochāyāya vatthabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the foot of a tree belonging to one clan: if the robe is kept within the area of the midday shadow of the tree, one must stay within that area. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānākulassa rukkhamūlaṁ hoti, hatthapāsā na vijahitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the foot of a tree belonging to many clans: one must not go beyond arm’s reach of the robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhokāso ekūpacāro nāma agāmake araññe samantā sattabbhantarā ekūpacāro,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Out in the open with one vicinity: in an uninhabited area, in the wilderness, one vicinity is the area covered by a circle with radius 80 meters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tato paraṁ nānūpacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever lies beyond that is many vicinities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vippavutthe vippavutthasaññī aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has stayed apart and he perceives that he has, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vippavutthe vematiko, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has stayed apart, but he is unsure of it, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vippavutthe avippavutthasaññī, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has stayed apart, but he does not perceive that he has, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaccuddhaṭe paccuddhaṭasaññī …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, but he perceives that it has, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avissajjite vissajjitasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been given away, but he perceives that it has, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anaṭṭhe naṭṭhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been lost, but he perceives that it has, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avinaṭṭhe vinaṭṭhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been ruined, but he perceives that it has, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adaḍḍhe daḍḍhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been burnt, but he perceives that it has, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avilutte viluttasaññī, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been stolen, but he perceives that it has, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyaṁ cīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he uses a robe that should be relinquished without first relinquishing it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avippavutthe vippavutthasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has not stayed apart, but he perceives that he has, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avippavutthe vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has not stayed apart, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avippavutthe avippavutthasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has not stayed apart and he does not perceive that he has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antoaruṇe paccuddharati, vissajjeti, nassati, vinassati, ḍayhati, acchinditvā gaṇhanti, vissāsaṁ gaṇhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if before dawn it has been relinquished, given away, lost, ruined, burnt, stolen, or taken on trust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhusammutiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has the permission of the monks; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udosita(dutiyakathina)sikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on storehouses, the second, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
