<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np23_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">23. Bhesajjasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">23. The training rule on tonics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā pilindavaccho rājagahe pabbhāraṁ sodhāpeti leṇaṁ kattukāmo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Pilindavaccha was clearing a slope near Rājagaha, intending to build a shelter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro yenāyasmā pilindavaccho tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ pilindavacchaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro āyasmantaṁ pilindavacchaṁ etadavoca—“kiṁ, bhante, thero kārāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha went to Pilindavaccha, bowed, sat down, and said, “Venerable, what are you having made?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pabbhāraṁ, mahārāja, sodhāpemi leṇaṁ kattukāmo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m clearing a slope, great king. I want to build a shelter.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Attho, bhante, ayyassa ārāmikenā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do you need a monastery worker?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, mahārāja, bhagavatā ārāmiko anuññāto”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha hasn’t allowed monastery workers.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhante, bhagavantaṁ paṭipucchitvā mama āroceyyāthā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Sir, please ask the Buddha and tell me the outcome.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ, mahārājā”ti kho āyasmā pilindavaccho rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa paccassosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, great king.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho rājānaṁ māgadhaṁ seniyaṁ bimbisāraṁ dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṁsesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pilindavaccha then instructed, inspired, and gladdened King Bimbisāra with a teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro āyasmatā pilindavacchena dhammiyā kathāya sandassito samādapito samuttejito sampahaṁsito uṭṭhāyāsanā āyasmantaṁ pilindavacchaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">after which the king got up from his seat, bowed down, circumambulated Pilindavaccha with his right side toward him, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho bhagavato santike dūtaṁ pāhesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards Pilindavaccha sent a message to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“rājā, bhante, māgadho seniyo bimbisāro ārāmikaṁ dātukāmo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Sir, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha wishes to provide a monastery worker. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ nu kho, bhante, mayā paṭipajjitabban”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What should I tell him?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha then gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, ārāmikan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow monastery workers.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro yenāyasmā pilindavaccho tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ pilindavacchaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro āyasmantaṁ pilindavacchaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Once again King Bimbisāra went to Pilindavaccha, bowed, sat down, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anuññāto, bhante, bhagavatā ārāmiko”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, has the Buddha allowed monastery workers?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ, mahārājā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, great king.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhante, ayyassa ārāmikaṁ dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, I’ll provide you with a monastery worker.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro āyasmato pilindavacchassa ārāmikaṁ paṭissuṇitvā vissaritvā cirena satiṁ paṭilabhitvā aññataraṁ sabbatthakaṁ mahāmattaṁ āmantesi—“yo mayā, bhaṇe, ayyassa ārāmiko paṭissuto, dinno so ārāmiko”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">But after making this promise, he forgot, and only remembered after a long time. He then addressed the official in charge of all practical affairs: “Listen, has the monastery worker I promised been provided?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, deva, ayyassa ārāmiko dinno”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir, he hasn’t.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kīvaciraṁ nu kho, bhaṇe, ito hi taṁ hotī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How long is it since we made that promise?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so mahāmatto rattiyo gaṇetvā rājānaṁ māgadhaṁ seniyaṁ bimbisāraṁ etadavoca—“pañca, deva, rattisatānī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The official counted the days and said, “It’s five hundred days.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, bhaṇe, ayyassa pañca ārāmikasatāni dehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, provide him with five hundred monastery workers.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ, devā”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kho so mahāmatto rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa paṭissuṇitvā āyasmato pilindavacchassa pañca ārāmikasatāni pādāsi, pāṭiyekko gāmo nivisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The official provided Pilindavaccha with those monastery workers and a separate village was established. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmikagāmakotipi naṁ āhaṁsu, pilindagāmakotipi naṁ āhaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They called it “The Monastery Workers’ Village” and “Pilinda Village”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā pilindavaccho tasmiṁ gāmake kulūpako hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And Pilindavaccha began associating with the families in that village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaraṁ ādāya pilindagāmakaṁ piṇḍāya pāvisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After robing up one morning, he took his bowl and robe and entered Pilinda Village for almsfood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena tasmiṁ gāmake ussavo hoti. Dārakā alaṅkatā mālākitā kīḷanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time they were holding a celebration in that village and the children were dressed up with ornaments and garlands. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho pilindagāmake sapadānaṁ piṇḍāya caramāno yena aññatarassa ārāmikassa nivesanaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As Pilindavaccha was walking on continuous almsround, he came to the house of a certain monastery worker, where he sat down on the prepared seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena tassā ārāmikiniyā dhītā aññe dārake alaṅkate mālākite passitvā rodati—“mālaṁ me detha, alaṅkāraṁ me dethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the daughter of that house had seen the other children dressed up in ornaments and garlands. She cried, saying, “Give me a garland! Give me ornaments!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho taṁ ārāmikiniṁ etadavoca—“kissāyaṁ dārikā rodatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pilindavaccha asked her mother why the girl was crying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayaṁ, bhante, dārikā aññe dārake alaṅkate mālākite passitvā rodati—‘mālaṁ me detha, alaṅkāraṁ me dethā’ti. Kuto amhākaṁ duggatānaṁ mālā kuto, alaṅkāro”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">She told him, adding, “Poor people like us can’t afford garlands and ornaments.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho aññataraṁ tiṇaṇḍupakaṁ gahetvā taṁ ārāmikiniṁ etadavoca—“handimaṁ tiṇaṇḍupakaṁ tassā dārikāya sīse paṭimuñcā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pilindavaccha took a pad of grass and said to the mother, “Here, place this on the girl’s head.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā ārāmikinī taṁ tiṇaṇḍupakaṁ gahetvā tassā dārikāya sīse paṭimuñci. Sā ahosi suvaṇṇamālā abhirūpā dassanīyā pāsādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She did, and it turned into a beautiful golden garland. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi tādisā raññopi antepure suvaṇṇamālā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even the royal compound had nothing like it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa ārocesuṁ—“amukassa, deva, ārāmikassa ghare suvaṇṇamālā abhirūpā dassanīyā pāsādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">People told King Bimbisāra, “In the house of such-and-such a monastery worker there’s a beautiful golden garland. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi tādisā devassāpi antepure suvaṇṇamālā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even in your court, sir, there’s nothing like it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuto tassa duggatassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So how did those poor people get it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṁsayaṁ corikāya ābhatā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They must have stolen it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro taṁ ārāmikakulaṁ bandhāpesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">King Bimbisāra had that family imprisoned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho āyasmā pilindavaccho pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaraṁ ādāya pilindagāmakaṁ piṇḍāya pāvisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Once again Pilindavaccha robed up in the morning, took his bowl and robe, and entered Pilinda Village for almsfood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pilindagāmake sapadānaṁ piṇḍāya caramāno yena tassa ārāmikassa nivesanaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paṭivissake pucchi—“kahaṁ imaṁ ārāmikakulaṁ gatan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">As he was walking on continuous almsround, he came to the house of that monastery worker. He then asked the neighbors what had happened to that family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Etissā, bhante, suvaṇṇamālāya kāraṇā raññā bandhāpitan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The king has jailed them, Venerable, because of that golden garland.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho yena rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa nivesanaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pilindavaccha then went to King Bimbisāra’s house and sat down on the prepared seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro yenāyasmā pilindavaccho tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ pilindavacchaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">King Bimbisāra approached Pilindavaccha, bowed, and sat down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ nisinnaṁ kho rājānaṁ māgadhaṁ seniyaṁ bimbisāraṁ āyasmā pilindavaccho etadavoca—“kissa, mahārāja, ārāmikakulaṁ bandhāpitan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pilindavaccha said, “Great king, why have you jailed the family of that monastery worker?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tassa, bhante, ārāmikassa ghare suvaṇṇamālā abhirūpā dassanīyā pāsādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, in the house of that monastery worker there was a beautiful golden garland. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natthi tādisā amhākampi antepure suvaṇṇamālā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even the royal compound has nothing like it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuto tassa duggatassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So how did those poor people get it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṁsayaṁ corikāya ābhatā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They must have stolen it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa pāsādaṁ suvaṇṇanti adhimucci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pilindavaccha then focused his mind on turning King Bimbisāra’s stilt house into gold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ahosi sabbasovaṇṇamayo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result, the whole house became gold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idaṁ pana te, mahārāja, tāva bahuṁ suvaṇṇaṁ kuto”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">He said, “Great king, how did you get so much gold?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātaṁ, bhante, ayyasseveso iddhānubhāvo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Understood, Sir! It’s your supernormal power.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ ārāmikakulaṁ muñcāpesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then released that family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā—“ayyena kira pilindavacchena sarājikāya parisāya uttarimanussadhammaṁ iddhipāṭihāriyaṁ dassitan”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">People said, “They say Venerable Pilindavaccha has performed a superhuman feat, a wonder of supernormal power, for the king and his court!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attamanā abhippasannā āyasmato pilindavacchassa pañca bhesajjāni abhihariṁsu, seyyathidaṁ—sappi navanītaṁ telaṁ madhu phāṇitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Being delighted and gaining confidence in Pilindavaccha, they brought him the five tonics: ghee, butter, oil, honey, and syrup. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pakatiyāpi ca āyasmā pilindavaccho lābhī hoti pañcannaṁ bhesajjānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Ordinarily, too, Pilindavaccha was getting the five tonics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Laddhaṁ laddhaṁ parisāya vissajjeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Since he was getting so much, he gave it away to his followers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisā cassa hoti bāhullikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who ended up with an abundance of tonics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Laddhaṁ laddhaṁ kolambepi ghaṭepi pūretvā paṭisāmeti, parissāvanānipi thavikāyopi pūretvā vātapānesu laggeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After filling up basins and waterpots and setting these aside, they filled their water filters and bags and hung these in the windows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni olīnavilīnāni tiṭṭhanti. Undūrehipi vihārā okiṇṇavikiṇṇā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the tonics were dripping, and the dwellings became infested with rats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā vihāracārikaṁ āhiṇḍantā passitvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people walking about the dwellings saw this, they complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“antokoṭṭhāgārikā ime samaṇā sakyaputtiyā, seyyathāpi rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These Sakyan monastics are hoarding things indoors, just like King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū evarūpāya bāhullāya cetessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can these monks choose to live with such abundance?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū te anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū evarūpāya bāhullāya cetentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that there are monks who live like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā evarūpāya bāhullāya cetessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those foolish men live like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kho pana tāni gilānānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ paṭisāyanīyāni bhesajjāni, seyyathidaṁ— sappi navanītaṁ telaṁ madhu phāṇitaṁ, tāni paṭiggahetvā sattāhaparamaṁ sannidhikārakaṁ paribhuñjitabbāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘After being received, the tonics allowable for sick monks—that is, ghee, butter, oil, honey, and syrup—should be used from storage for at most seven days. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ atikkāmayato nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If one uses them beyond that, one commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kho pana tāni gilānānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ paṭisāyanīyāni bhesajjānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tonics allowable for sick monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappi nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Ghee: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gosappi vā ajikāsappi vā mahiṁsasappi vā yesaṁ maṁsaṁ kappati tesaṁ sappi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">ghee from cows, ghee from goats, ghee from buffaloes, or ghee from whatever animal whose meat is allowable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navanītaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Butter: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṁyeva navanītaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">butter from the same animals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Telaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Oil: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tilatelaṁ sāsapatelaṁ madhukatelaṁ eraṇḍatelaṁ vasātelaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">sesame oil, mustard-seed oil, honey-tree oil, castor oil, oil from fat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Madhu nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Honey: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkhikāmadhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">honey from bees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phāṇitaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Syrup: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ucchumhā nibbattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from sugarcane. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni paṭiggahetvā sattāhaparamaṁ sannidhikārakaṁ paribhuñjitabbānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">After being received, they should be used from storage for at most seven days: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattāhaparamatā paribhuñjitabbāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they are to be used for seven days at a maximum. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ atikkāmayato nissaggiyaṁ hotīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If one uses them beyond that, one commits an offense entailing relinquishment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhame aruṇuggamane nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it becomes subject to relinquishment at dawn on the eighth day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tonics should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, they should be relinquished like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṁ me, bhante, bhesajjaṁ sattāhātikkantaṁ nissaggiyaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, these tonics, which I have kept over seven days, are to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmīti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish them to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give these tonics back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattāhātikkante atikkantasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than seven days and he perceives it as more, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattāhātikkante vematiko, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than seven days, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattāhātikkante anatikkantasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than seven days, but he perceives it as less, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhiṭṭhite adhiṭṭhitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they have not been determined, but he perceives that they have, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avissajjite vissajjitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they have not been given away, but he perceives that they have, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaṭṭhe naṭṭhasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they have not been lost, but he perceives that they have, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avinaṭṭhe vinaṭṭhasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they have not been ruined, but he perceives that they have, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaḍḍhe daḍḍhasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they have not been burnt, but he perceives that they have, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avilutte viluttasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they have not been stolen, but he perceives that they have, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṭṭhaṁ paṭilabhitvā na kāyikena paribhogena paribhuñjitabbaṁ, na ajjhoharitabbaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the relinquished tonics have been returned, they are not to be used on the body, nor are they to be eaten. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padīpe vā kāḷavaṇṇe vā upanetabbaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">They may be used in lamps or as a black coloring agent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññena bhikkhunā kāyikena paribhogena paribhuñjitabbaṁ, na ajjhoharitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other monks may use them on the body, but they may not eat them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattāhānatikkante atikkantasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than seven days, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattāhānatikkante vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than seven days, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattāhānatikkante anatikkantasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than seven days and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antosattāhaṁ adhiṭṭheti, vissajjeti, nassati, vinassati, ḍayhati, acchinditvā gaṇhanti, vissāsaṁ gaṇhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if within seven days they have been determined, given away, lost, ruined, burnt, stolen, or taken on trust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupasampannassa cattena vantena muttena anapekkho datvā paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, without any desire for them, he gives them up to a person who is not fully ordained, and he then obtains them again and then uses them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhesajjasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on tonics, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
