<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc82_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">82. Pariṇāmanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">82. The training rule on diverting </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṁ aññatarassa pūgassa saṅghassa sacīvarabhattaṁ paṭiyattaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">an association had prepared a meal together with robes for the Sangha. They said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhojetvā cīvarena acchādessāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“After giving the food, we’ll offer the robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū yena so pūgo tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the monks from the group of six went to that association </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā taṁ pūgaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dethāvuso, imāni cīvarāni imesaṁ bhikkhūnan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please give these robes to these monks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na mayaṁ, bhante, dassāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, we can’t do that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākaṁ saṅghassa anuvassaṁ sacīvarabhikkhā paññattā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">We’ve prepared our annual alms-offering together with robes for the Sangha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bahū, āvuso, saṅghassa dāyakā, bahū saṅghassa bhattā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Sangha has many donors and supporters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime tumhe nissāya tumhe sampassantā idha viharanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But since these monks are staying here, they are looking to you for support. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhe ce imesaṁ na dassatha, atha ko carahi imesaṁ dassati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t give to them, who will? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dethāvuso, imāni cīvarāni imesaṁ bhikkhūnan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So give them these robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so pūgo chabbaggiyehi bhikkhūhi nippīḷiyamāno yathāpaṭiyattaṁ cīvaraṁ chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ datvā saṅghaṁ bhattena parivisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Being pressured by the monks from the group of six, that association gave the prepared robes to those monks and served the food to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū jānanti saṅghassa sacīvarabhattaṁ paṭiyattaṁ “na ca jānanti chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ dinnan”ti te evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks who knew that a meal together with robes had been prepared for the Sangha, but not that the robes had been given to those monks from the group of six, said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“oṇojethāvuso, saṅghassa cīvaran”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You may offer the robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthi, bhante.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There aren’t any. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāpaṭiyattaṁ cīvaraṁ ayyā chabbaggiyā ayyānaṁ chabbaggiyānaṁ pariṇāmesun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robes we had prepared were diverted by the monks from the group of six.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū jānaṁ saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇataṁ puggalassa pariṇāmessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six divert to an individual things they knew were intended for the Sangha?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, jānaṁ saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇataṁ puggalassa pariṇāmethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, jānaṁ saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇataṁ puggalassa pariṇāmessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇataṁ puggalassa pariṇāmeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk diverts to an individual material support that he knows was intended for the Sangha, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti, aññe vā tassa ārocenti, so vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the donor has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghikaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghassa dinnaṁ hoti pariccattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">given to the Sangha, given up to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Material support: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārā, antamaso cuṇṇapiṇḍopi, dantakaṭṭhampi, dasikasuttampi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">robes, almsfood, a dwelling, and medicine; even a bit of bath powder, a tooth cleaner, or a piece of string. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Intended: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dassāma karissāmā”ti vācā bhinnā hoti, taṁ puggalassa pariṇāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they have said, “We’ll give,” “We’ll prepare,” and he diverts it to an individual, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇate pariṇatasaññī puggalassa pariṇāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for the Sangha and he perceives it as such, and he diverts it to an individual, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇate vematiko puggalassa pariṇāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for the Sangha, but he is unsure of it, and he diverts it to an individual, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇate apariṇatasaññī puggalassa pariṇāmeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for the Sangha, but he does not perceive it as such, and he diverts it to an individual, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghassa pariṇataṁ aññasaṅghassa vā cetiyassa vā pariṇāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for one Sangha and he diverts it to another Sangha or to a shrine, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetiyassa pariṇataṁ aññacetiyassa vā saṅghassa vā puggalassa vā pariṇāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for one shrine and he diverts it to another shrine or to a sangha or to an individual, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalassa pariṇataṁ aññapuggalassa vā saṅghassa vā cetiyassa vā pariṇāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for an individual and he diverts it to another individual or to a sangha or to a shrine, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apariṇate pariṇatasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not intended for the Sangha, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apariṇate vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not intended for the Sangha, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apariṇate apariṇatasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not intended for the Sangha and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kattha demā”ti pucchīyamāno—</span></p>
<p class="p3">if being asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yattha tumhākaṁ deyyadhammo paribhogaṁ vā labheyya paṭisaṅkhāraṁ vā labheyya ciraṭṭhitiko vā assa yattha vā pana tumhākaṁ cittaṁ pasīdati tattha dethā”ti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Where may we give?” he says, “Give where your gift goes toward equipment,” “… where it goes toward repairs,” “… where it will last for a long time,” “… where you feel inspired;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇāmanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dvādasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on diverting, the twelfth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavaggo aṭṭhamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth sub-chapter on legitimately is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhamma vivaṇṇañca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Legitimately, and disparaging, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mohāpanaṁ pahārakaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Deception, hitting; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Talasatti amūlañca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Raising a hand, and groundless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sañcicca ca upassuti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And intentionally, eavesdropping; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭibāhana chandañca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Obstructing, and consent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dabbañca pariṇāmananti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And Dabba, diverting.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
