<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc5_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">5. Sahaseyyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">5. The training rule on the same sleeping place </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā āḷaviyaṁ viharati aggāḷave cetiye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Āḷavī at the Aggāḷava Shrine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena upāsakā ārāmaṁ āgacchanti dhammassavanāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the lay followers were coming to the monastery to listen to the Teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhamme bhāsite therā bhikkhū yathāvihāraṁ gacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the instruction was over, the senior monks went to their own dwellings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navakā bhikkhū tattheva upaṭṭhānasālāyaṁ upāsakehi saddhiṁ muṭṭhassatī, asampajānā, naggā, vikūjamānā, kākacchamānā seyyaṁ kappenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the newly ordained monks lay down right there in the assembly hall together with the lay followers—absentminded, heedless, naked, muttering, and snoring. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The lay followers complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhadantā muṭṭhassatī asampajānā naggā vikūjamānā kākacchamānā seyyaṁ kappessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the venerables lie down absentminded, heedless, naked, muttering, and snoring?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ upāsakānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those lay followers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū anupasampannena sahaseyyaṁ kappessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can monks lie down in the same sleeping place as people who are not fully ordained?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū te navake bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those newly ordained monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū anupasampannena sahaseyyaṁ kappentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that monks did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā anupasampannena sahaseyyaṁ kappessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu anupasampannena sahaseyyaṁ kappeyya pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk lies down in the same sleeping place as a person who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āḷaviyaṁ yathābhirantaṁ viharitvā yena kosambī tena cārikaṁ pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After staying at Āḷavī for as long as he wanted, the Buddha set out wandering toward Kosambī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupubbena cārikaṁ caramāno yena kosambī tadavasari. Tatra sudaṁ bhagavā kosambiyaṁ viharati badarikārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he eventually arrived, he stayed at the Badarikā Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ rāhulaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the monks there said to Venerable Rāhula, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā, āvuso rāhula, sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ—‘na anupasampannena sahaseyyā kappetabbā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Rāhula, the Buddha has laid down a training rule that we can’t lie down in the same sleeping place as a person who’s not fully ordained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyaṁ, āvuso rāhula, jānāhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please find another sleeping place.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā rāhulo seyyaṁ alabhamāno vaccakuṭiyā seyyaṁ kappesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Since Rāhula was not able to find a sleeping place, he lay down in the restroom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā rattiyā paccūsasamayaṁ paccuṭṭhāya yena vaccakuṭi tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ukkāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after rising early in the morning, the Buddha went to the restroom, where he cleared his throat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmāpi rāhulo ukkāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Rāhula, too, cleared his throat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko etthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who’s there?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahaṁ, bhagavā, rāhulo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s me, Sir, Rāhula.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kissa tvaṁ, rāhula, idha nisinnosī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why are you sitting here, Rāhula?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā rāhulo bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Rāhula told the Buddha what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, anupasampannena dirattatirattaṁ sahaseyyaṁ kappetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to lie down in the same sleeping place as a person who isn’t fully ordained for two or three nights. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu anupasampannena uttaridirattatirattaṁ sahaseyyaṁ kappeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk lies down more than two or three nights in the same sleeping place as a person who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who is not fully ordained: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuṁ ṭhapetvā avaseso anupasampanno nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone except a fully ordained monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttaridirattatirattanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">more than two or three nights: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atirekadirattatirattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in excess of two or three nights. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Same: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sleeping place: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbacchannā, sabbaparicchannā, yebhuyyenacchannā, yebhuyyena paricchannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">fully roofed, fully walled; mostly roofed, mostly walled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyaṁ kappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lies down in the same sleeping place: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthe divase atthaṅgate sūriye, anupasampanne nipanne, bhikkhu nipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">at dawn on the fourth day: if he lies down when the person who is not fully ordained is already lying down, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu nipanne, anupasampanno nipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the person who is not fully ordained lies down when he is already lying down, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho vā nipajjanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they both lie down together, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṭṭhahitvā punappunaṁ nipajjanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">every time they get up and then lie down again, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī uttaridirattatirattaṁ sahaseyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are not fully ordained, and the monk does not perceive them as such, and he lies down more than two or three nights in the same sleeping place as them, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko uttaridirattatirattaṁ sahaseyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are not fully ordained, but the monk is unsure of it, and he lies down more than two or three nights in the same sleeping place as them, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī uttaridirattatirattaṁ sahaseyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are is not fully ordained, but the monk perceives them as such, and he lies down more than two or three nights in the same sleeping place as them, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upaḍḍhacchanne upaḍḍhaparicchanne, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is half-roofed and half-walled, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are fully ordained, but the monk does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are fully ordained, but the monk is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they are fully ordained, and the monk perceives them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvetisso rattiyo vasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stays together with them for two or three nights; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"> ūnakadvetisso rattiyo vasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stays together with them for less than two or three nights; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve rattiyo vasitvā tatiyāya rattiyā purāruṇā nikkhamitvā puna vasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, after staying together for two nights, he leaves before dawn on the third night and then stays together again; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbacchanne sabbaaparicchanne,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is fully roofed, but not walled; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaparicchanne sabbaacchanne,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is fully walled, but not roofed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena acchanne,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is mostly not roofed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena aparicchanne,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is mostly not walled; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupasampanne nipanne bhikkhu nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monk sits when the person who is not fully ordained is lying down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu nipanne anupasampanno nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the person who is not fully ordained sits when the monk is lying down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho vā nisīdanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they both sit; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahaseyyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on the same sleeping place, the fifth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
