<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np28_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">28. Accekacīvarasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">28. The training rule on haste-cloth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro mahāmatto pavāsaṁ gacchanto bhikkhūnaṁ santike dūtaṁ pāhesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">a government official who was going away sent a message to the monks, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgacchantu bhadantā vassāvāsikaṁ dassāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Venerables, I wish to give a robe to those who have completed the rainy-season residence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vassaṁvuṭṭhānaṁ bhagavatā vassāvāsikaṁ anuññātan”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha has allowed such robes only for those who have completed the rains residence,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuccāyantā nāgamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and being afraid of wrongdoing they did not go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so mahāmatto ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That government official complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhadantā mayā dūte pahite nāgacchissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can they not come when I send a message? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi senāya gacchāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m going out with the army. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dujjānaṁ jīvitaṁ dujjānaṁ maraṇan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s hard to know whether I’ll live or die.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa mahāmattassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that government official, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, accekacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā nikkhipitun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to receive a haste-cloth, and then store it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When they heard about this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā anuññātaṁ accekacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā nikkhipitun”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">accekacīvarāni paṭiggahetvā cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">monks received haste-cloths and stored them beyond the robe season, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni cīvarāni cīvaravaṁse bhaṇḍikābaddhāni tiṭṭhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">keeping them in bundles on a bamboo robe rack. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasa kho āyasmā ānando senāsanacārikaṁ āhiṇḍanto tāni cīvarāni cīvaravaṁse bhaṇḍikābaddhāni tiṭṭhante disvā bhikkhū etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">While walking about the dwellings, Venerable Ānanda saw that cloth, and he asked the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kassimāni, āvuso, cīvarāni cīvaravaṁse bhaṇḍikābaddhāni tiṭṭhantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whose cloth is this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amhākaṁ, āvuso, accekacīvarānī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s our haste-cloth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kīvaciraṁ panāvuso, imāni cīvarāni nikkhittānī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how long have you stored it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmato ānandassa yathānikkhittaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ānando ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda then complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū accekacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can these monks receive haste-cloth and then store it beyond the robe season?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando te bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi …pe…—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, Ānanda told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū accekacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that there are monks who do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā accekacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, how can those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dasāhānāgataṁ kattikatemāsikapuṇṇamaṁ bhikkhuno paneva accekacīvaraṁ uppajjeyya, accekaṁ maññamānena bhikkhunā paṭiggahetabbaṁ, paṭiggahetvā yāva cīvarakālasamayaṁ nikkhipitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When there are ten days left to the Kattika full moon that ends the first rainy-season residence and haste-cloth is given to a monk, he may receive it if he regards it as urgent. He may then store it until the end of the robe season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari nikkhipeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stores it beyond that, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhānāgatanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are ten days left: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasāhānāgatāya pavāraṇāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the invitation procedure is ten days in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kattikatemāsikapuṇṇamanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Kattika full moon that ends the first rainy-season residence: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāraṇā kattikā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Kattika full moon of the invitation procedure is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accekacīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Haste-cloth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">senāya vā gantukāmo hoti, pavāsaṁ vā gantukāmo hoti, gilāno vā hoti, gabbhinī vā hoti, assaddhassa vā saddhā uppannā hoti, appasannassa vā pasādo uppanno hoti, so ce bhikkhūnaṁ santike dūtaṁ pahiṇeyya— “āgacchantu bhadantā vassāvāsikaṁ dassāmī”ti, etaṁ accekacīvaraṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when someone wants to go out with the army, when someone wants to go away, when someone is sick, when someone is pregnant, when someone without faith acquires faith, when someone without confidence acquires confidence—if that person sends a message to the monks, saying, “Come, Venerables, I wish to give a robe to those who have completed the rainy-season residence,” this is called “haste-cloth”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accekaṁ maññamānena bhikkhunā paṭiggahetabbaṁ paṭiggahetvā yāva cīvarakālasamayaṁ nikkhipitabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He may receive it if he regards it as urgent. He may then store it until the end of the robe season: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāṇaṁ katvā nikkhipitabbaṁ—“idaṁ accekacīvaran”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">establishing the perception of it as a haste-cloth, he may store it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvarakālasamayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe season: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthate kathine vassānassa pacchimo māso,</span></p>
<p class="p3">for one who has not participated in the robe-making procedure, it is the last month of the rainy season; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthate kathine pañcamāsā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for one who has participated in the robe-making procedure, it is the five month period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari nikkhipeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stores it beyond that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthate kathine vassānassa pacchimaṁ divasaṁ atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for one who has not participated in the robe-making procedure, if he goes beyond the last day of the rainy season, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthate kathine kathinuddhāradivasaṁ atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For one who has participated in the robe-making procedure, if he goes beyond the day on which the robe-making season ends, the cloth becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The cloth should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṁ me, bhante, accekacīvaraṁ cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this haste-cloth, which I have kept beyond the robe season, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmīti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this cloth back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accekacīvare accekacīvarasaññī cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is haste-cloth and he perceives it as such, and he keeps it beyond the robe season, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accekacīvare vematiko cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is haste-cloth, but he is unsure of it, and he keeps it beyond the robe season, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accekacīvare anaccekacīvarasaññī cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is haste-cloth, but he does not perceive it as such, and he keeps it beyond the robe season, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhiṭṭhite adhiṭṭhitasaññī …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been determined, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avikappite vikappitasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been transferred, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avissajjite vissajjitasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been given away, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anaṭṭhe naṭṭhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been lost, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avinaṭṭhe vinaṭṭhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been ruined, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adaḍḍhe daḍḍhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been burnt, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avilutte viluttasaññī cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been stolen, but he perceives that it has, and he keeps it beyond the robe season, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyaṁ cīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he uses a cloth that should be relinquished without first relinquishing it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaccekacīvare accekacīvarasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not haste-cloth, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaccekacīvare vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not haste-cloth, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaccekacīvare anaccekacīvarasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not haste-cloth and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antosamaye adhiṭṭheti, vikappeti, vissajjeti, nassati, vinassati, ḍayhati, acchinditvā gaṇhanti, vissāsaṁ gaṇhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if within the robe season the haste-cloth is determined, transferred to another, given away, lost, ruined, burnt, stolen, or taken on trust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accekacīvarasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on haste-cloth, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
