<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc33_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on eating </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">33. Paramparabhojanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">33. The training rule on eating a meal before another </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā vesāliyaṁ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood near Vesālī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena vesāliyaṁ paṇītānaṁ bhattānaṁ bhattapaṭipāṭi adhiṭṭhitā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a succession of fine meals had been arranged in Vesālī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññatarassa daliddassa kammakārassa etadahosi—“na kho idaṁ orakaṁ bhavissati yathayime manussā sakkaccaṁ bhattaṁ karonti; yannūnāhampi bhattaṁ kareyyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A certain poor worker thought, “Why don’t I prepare a meal? It must be really worthwhile, seeing as these people prepare a meal with such respect.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so daliddo kammakāro yena kirapatiko tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ kirapatikaṁ etadavoca—“icchāmahaṁ, ayyaputta, buddhappamukhassa bhikkhusaṅghassa bhattaṁ kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then went to his boss Kira and said, “Sir, I wish to prepare a meal for the Sangha of monks headed by the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dehi me vetanan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please give me my salary.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sopi kho kirapatiko saddho hoti pasanno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because Kira also had faith and confidence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so kirapatiko tassa daliddassa kammakārassa abbhātirekaṁ vetanaṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he gave the worker his salary and much extra. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so daliddo kammakāro yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so daliddo kammakāro bhagavantaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards that worker went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“adhivāsetu me, bhante, bhagavā svātanāya bhattaṁ saddhiṁ bhikkhusaṅghenā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Sir, please accept a meal from me tomorrow together with the Sangha of monks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mahā kho, āvuso, bhikkhusaṅgho, jānāhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Sangha is large.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Hotu, bhante, mahā bhikkhusaṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No problem! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahū me badarā paṭiyattā badaramissena peyyā paripūrissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve prepare much jujube, supplemented with jujube drinks.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha consented by remaining silent, and the worker understood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so daliddo kammakāro bhagavato adhivāsanaṁ viditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He got up from his seat, circumambulated the Buddha with his right side toward him, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū—“daliddena kira kammakārena svātanāya buddhappamukho bhikkhusaṅgho nimantito, badaramissena peyyā paripūrissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard that a poor worker had invited the Sangha of monks headed by the Buddha on the following day for a meal supplemented with jujube drinks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te kālasseva piṇḍāya caritvā bhuñjiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so they ate in the morning after walking for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho manussā—“daliddena kira kammakārena buddhappamukho bhikkhusaṅgho nimantito”ti. Te daliddassa kammakārassa pahūtaṁ khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ abhihariṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people heard that a poor worker had invited the Sangha of monks headed by the Buddha for a meal, they brought much food of various kinds to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so daliddo kammakāro tassā rattiyā accayena paṇītaṁ khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ paṭiyādāpetvā bhagavato kālaṁ ārocāpesi—“kālo, bhante, niṭṭhitaṁ bhattan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The following morning that worker prepared his food, and then had the Buddha informed that the meal was ready. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena tassa daliddassa kammakārassa nivesanaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi saddhiṁ bhikkhusaṅghena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha robed up, took his bowl and robe and, together with the Sangha of monks, went to the house of that poor worker, where he sat down on the prepared seat in the dining hall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so daliddo kammakāro bhattagge bhikkhū parivisati. Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The worker served the monks, but they kept saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“thokaṁ, āvuso, dehi. Thokaṁ, āvuso, dehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give just a little.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā kho tumhe, bhante, ‘ayaṁ daliddo kammakāro’ti thokaṁ thokaṁ paṭiggaṇhittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, don’t accept so little because you think I’m just a poor worker. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahūtaṁ me khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ paṭiyattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve prepared much food of various kinds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggaṇhatha, bhante, yāvadatthan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please accept as much as you like.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho mayaṁ, āvuso, etaṅkāraṇā thokaṁ thokaṁ paṭiggaṇhāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We’re not accepting so little because of that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca, mayaṁ kālasseva piṇḍāya caritvā bhuñjimhā; tena mayaṁ thokaṁ thokaṁ paṭiggaṇhāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but because we ate in the morning after walking for alms.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so daliddo kammakāro ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That poor worker complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhadantā mayā nimantitā aññatra bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the venerables eat elsewhere when invited by me? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāhaṁ paṭibalo yāvadatthaṁ dātun”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Am I not able to give as much as they need?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa daliddassa kammakārassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that worker, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū aññatra nimantitā aññatra bhuñjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those monks eat elsewhere when invited for a meal?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū aññatra nimantitā aññatra bhuñjantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that monks did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā aññatra nimantitā aññatra bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paramparabhojane pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats a meal before another, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu gilāno hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a certain monk became sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu piṇḍapātaṁ ādāya yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—“bhuñjāhi, āvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Another monk took some almsfood, went to that monk, and told him to eat it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alaṁ, āvuso, atthi me bhattapaccāsā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I can’t. I’m expecting another meal.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa bhikkhuno piṇḍapāto ussūre āharīyittha. So bhikkhu na cittarūpaṁ bhuñji.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But since that almsfood only arrived at midday, that monk did not get to eat as much as he had intended. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānena bhikkhunā paramparabhojanaṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a sick monk to eat a meal before another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paramparabhojane, aññatra samayā, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats a meal before another, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyaṁ samayo. Gilānasamayo—ayaṁ tattha samayo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the appropriate occasion: he is sick.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena manussā cīvaradānasamaye sacīvarabhattaṁ paṭiyādetvā bhikkhū nimantenti—“bhojetvā cīvarena acchādessāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards, during the robe-giving season, people prepared a meal together with robe-cloth and then invited the monks, saying, “We wish to offer a meal and give robe-cloth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū kukkuccāyantā nādhivāsenti—“paṭikkhittaṁ bhagavatā paramparabhojanan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But knowing that the Buddha had prohibited eating a meal before another and being afraid of wrongdoing, they did not accept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ parittaṁ uppajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result, they only got a small amount of robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, cīvaradānasamaye paramparabhojanaṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to eat a meal before another during the robe-giving season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paramparabhojane, aññatra samayā, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats a meal before another, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyaṁ samayo. Gilānasamayo, cīvaradānasamayo—ayaṁ tattha samayo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the appropriate occasions: he is sick; it is the robe-giving season.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena manussā cīvarakārake bhikkhū bhattena nimantenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards people invited the robe-making monks for a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū kukkuccāyantā nādhivāsenti—“paṭikkhittaṁ bhagavatā paramparabhojanan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But knowing that the Buddha had prohibited eating a meal before another and being afraid of wrongdoing, they did not accept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, cīvarakārasamaye paramparabhojanaṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to eat a meal before another at a time when you are making robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paramparabhojane, aññatra samayā, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats a meal before another, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyaṁ samayo. Gilānasamayo, cīvaradānasamayo, cīvarakārasamayo—ayaṁ tattha samayo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the appropriate occasions: he is sick; it is the robe-giving season; it is a time of making robes.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya āyasmatā ānandena pacchāsamaṇena yena aññataraṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards, after robing up in the morning, the Buddha took his bowl and robe and went to a certain family with Venerable Ānanda as his attendant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Atha kho te manussā bhagavato ca āyasmato ca ānandassa bhojanaṁ adaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He sat down on the prepared seat, and the people there gave cooked food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ānando kukkuccāyanto na paṭiggaṇhāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Being afraid of wrongdoing, Ānanda did not accept it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gaṇhāhi, ānandā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said, “Accept it, Ānanda.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alaṁ, bhagavā, atthi me bhattapaccāsā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I can’t, Venerable Sir, I’m expecting another meal.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tenahānanda, vikappetvā gaṇhāhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Ānanda, transfer that meal to someone else and then receive this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—“</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, vikappetvā paramparabhojanaṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to eat a meal before another if you transfer the other meal to someone else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, vikappetabbaṁ—‘mayhaṁ bhattapaccāsaṁ itthannāmassa dammī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, this is how it should be transferred: ‘I give my expected meal to so-and-so.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paramparabhojanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Eats a meal before another: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññatarena bhojanena nimantito, taṁ ṭhapetvā aññaṁ pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññataraṁ bhojanaṁ bhuñjati, etaṁ paramparabhojanaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has been invited to eat any of the five cooked foods, and he then eats any of the five cooked foods elsewhere—this is called “eats a meal before another”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra samayāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except on an appropriate occasion: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā samayaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless it is an appropriate occasion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānasamayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkoti ekāsane nisinno yāvadatthaṁ bhuñjituṁ. “Gilānasamayo”ti bhuñjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not able to eat as much as he needs in one sitting, he may eat a meal before another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaradānasamayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is the robe-giving season: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthate kathine vassānassa pacchimo māso, atthate kathine pañca māsā. “Cīvaradānasamayo”ti bhuñjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has not participated in the robe-making procedure, he may eat a meal before another during the last month of the rainy season. If he has participated in the robe-making procedure, he may eat a meal before another during the five month period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvarakārasamayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is a time of making robes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvare kayiramāne. “Cīvarakārasamayo”ti bhuñjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when he is making robes, he may eat a meal before another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññatra samayā bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives food with the intention of eating it, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paramparabhojane paramparabhojanasaññī, aññatra samayā, bhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a meal before another, and he perceives it as such, and he eats it, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paramparabhojane vematiko, aññatra samayā, bhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a meal before another, but he is unsure of it, and he eats it, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paramparabhojane naparamparabhojanasaññī, aññatra samayā, bhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a meal before another, but he does not perceive it as such, and he eats it, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naparamparabhojane paramparabhojanasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a meal before another, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naparamparabhojane vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a meal before another, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naparamparabhojane naparamparabhojanasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a meal before another, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is an appropriate occasion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vikappetvā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he transfers his other meal to someone else and then eats; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve tayo nimantane ekato bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats the food from two or three invitational meals together; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nimantanapaṭipāṭiyā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats the meals in the same order that the invitations were received; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakalena gāmena nimantito tasmiṁ gāme yattha katthaci bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is invited by a whole village and he eats anywhere in that village; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakalena pūgena nimantito tasmiṁ pūge yattha katthaci bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is invited by a whole association and he eats anywhere that belongs to that association; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nimantiyamāno bhikkhaṁ gahessāmīti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when being invited, he says, “I’ll get almsfood;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niccabhatte,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a regular meal invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">salākabhatte,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a meal for which lots are drawn; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pakkhike,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a half-monthly meal; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uposathike,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is on the observance day; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭipadike,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is on the day after the observance day; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni ṭhapetvā sabbattha anāpatti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is anything apart from the five cooked foods; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paramparabhojanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on eating a meal before another, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
