<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc27_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">27. Saṁvidhānasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">27. The training rule on appointments </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six traveled by appointment with nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yatheva mayaṁ sapajāpatikā āhiṇḍāma, evamevime samaṇā sakyaputtiyā bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya āhiṇḍantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just as we walk about with our wives, so these Sakyan monastics walk about by appointment with nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six travel by appointment with the nuns?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhunīhi saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjeyya, antamaso gāmantarampi, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk travels by appointment with a nun, even just to the next village, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū ca bhikkhuniyo ca sāketā sāvatthiṁ addhānamaggappaṭipannā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a number of monks and nuns were traveling from Sāketa to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo te bhikkhū etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns said to the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mayampi ayyehi saddhiṁ gamissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Let’s go together.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na, bhaginī, kappati bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sisters, it’s not allowable for us to travel by appointment with nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhe vā paṭhamaṁ gacchatha mayaṁ vā gamissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Either you go first, or we will.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayyā, bhante, aggapurisā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You have the higher status, Venerables. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyāva paṭhamaṁ gacchantū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go first.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tāsaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ pacchā gacchantīnaṁ antarāmagge corā acchindiṁsu ca dūsesuñca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But because the nuns went behind, they were robbed and raped by bandits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When they arrived at Sāvatthī, they told the nuns there what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns then told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, satthagamanīye magge sāsaṅkasammate sappaṭibhaye bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to travel by appointment with a nun if it’s a risky and dangerous road that should be traveled with a group. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuniyā saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjeyya, antamaso gāmantarampi, aññatra samayā, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk travels by appointment with a nun, even just to the next village, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyaṁ samayo. Satthagamanīyo hoti maggo sāsaṅkasammato sappaṭibhayo—ayaṁ tattha samayo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the appropriate occasion: the road is considered risky and dangerous and should be traveled with a group.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidhāyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">By appointment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gacchāma, bhagini, gacchāmāyya; gacchāmāyya, gacchāma, bhagini; ajja vā hiyyo vā pare vā gacchāmā”ti saṁvidahati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes an appointment like this: he says, “Let’s go, Sister,” and she replies, “Yes, let’s go, Venerable;” or she says, “Let’s go, Venerable,” and he replies, “Yes, let’s go, Sister;” or he says, “Let’s go today,” “Let’s go tomorrow,” “Let’s go the day after tomorrow,” then he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antamaso gāmantarampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even just to the next village: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuṭasampāte gāme, gāmantare gāmantare āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the villages are a chicken’s flight apart, then for every next village he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agāmake araññe, addhayojane addhayojane āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it is an uninhabited area, a wilderness, then for every six kilometers he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra samayāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except on an appropriate occasion: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā samayaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless it is an appropriate occasion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthagamanīyo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The road should be traveled with a group: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maggo na sakkā hoti vinā satthena gantuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is not possible to travel without a group. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāsaṅkaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Risky: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ magge corānaṁ niviṭṭhokāso dissati, bhuttokāso dissati, ṭhitokāso dissati, nisinnokāso dissati, nipannokāso dissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a place has been seen along that road where criminals are camped, eating, standing, sitting, or lying down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappaṭibhayaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dangerous: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ magge corehi manussā hatā dissanti, viluttā dissanti, ākoṭitā dissanti, sappaṭibhayaṁ gantvā appaṭibhayaṁ dassetvā uyyojetabbā— “gacchatha, bhaginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">criminals have been seen along that road, injuring, robbing, or beating people. If they go together thinking it is dangerous, but then see that it is not, the nuns are to be dismissed, “Go, Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidahite saṁvidahitasaññī ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, aññatra samayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is an appointment, and he perceives that there is, and he travels with a nun, even just to the next village, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidahite vematiko ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, aññatra samayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is an appointment, but he is unsure of it, and he travels with a nun, even just to the next village, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidahite, asaṁvidahitasaññī ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, aññatra samayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is an appointment, but he does not perceive that there is, and he travels with a nun, even just to the next village, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu saṁvidahati bhikkhunī na saṁvidahati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk makes an appointment, but the nun does not express her agreement, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṁvidahite saṁvidahitasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is no appointment, but he perceives that there is, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṁvidahite vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is no appointment, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṁvidahite asaṁvidahitasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is no appointment, and he does not perceive that there is, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is an appropriate occasion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṁvidahitvā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes without an appointment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunī saṁvidahati, bhikkhu na saṁvidahati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the nun has made an appointment, but he has not expressed his agreement; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">visaṅketena gacchanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they go, but not according to the appointment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidhānasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The  training rule on appointments, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
