<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np3_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">3. Tatiyakathinasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">3. The third training rule on the robe-making season </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno akālacīvaraṁ uppannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk had been given robe-cloth outside the robe season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṁ cīvaraṁ kayiramānaṁ nappahoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">While he was making the robe, he realized there was not enough cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu taṁ cīvaraṁ ussāpetvā punappunaṁ vimajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lifting it up, he smoothed it out again and again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā senāsanacārikaṁ āhiṇḍanto taṁ bhikkhuṁ taṁ cīvaraṁ ussāpetvā punappunaṁ vimajjantaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">While walking about the dwellings, the Buddha saw that monk acting in this way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He went up to him and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, bhikkhu, imaṁ cīvaraṁ ussāpetvā punappunaṁ vimajjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What are you doing, monk?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idaṁ me, bhante, akālacīvaraṁ uppannaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’ve been given this out-of-season robe-cloth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kayiramānaṁ nappahoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but it’s not enough to make a robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tenāhaṁ imaṁ cīvaraṁ ussāpetvā punappunaṁ vimajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why I lift it up and smooth it out again and again.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi pana te, bhikkhu, cīvarapaccāsā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are you expecting to receive more cloth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I am.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā, bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, akālacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā cīvarapaccāsā nikkhipitun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to keep out-of-season robe-cloth if you are expecting to receive more.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū—“bhagavatā anuññātaṁ akālacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā cīvarapaccāsā nikkhipitun”ti akālacīvarāni paṭiggahetvā atirekamāsaṁ nikkhipanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When they heard about this, some monks kept out-of-season robe-cloth for more than a month, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni cīvarāni cīvaravaṁse bhaṇḍikābaddhāni tiṭṭhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">keeping them in bundles on a bamboo robe rack. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā ānando senāsanacārikaṁ āhiṇḍanto tāni cīvarāni cīvaravaṁse bhaṇḍikābaddhāni tiṭṭhante.</span></p>
<p class="p3">While walking about the dwellings, Venerable Ānanda saw that robe-cloth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he asked the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kassimāni, āvuso, cīvarāni cīvaravaṁse bhaṇḍikābaddhāni tiṭṭhantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whose cloth is this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amhākaṁ, āvuso, akālacīvarāni cīvarapaccāsā nikkhittānī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s our out-of-season robe-cloth, which we’re keeping because we’re expecting more.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kīvaciraṁ panāvuso, imāni cīvarāni nikkhittānī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how long have you kept it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atirekamāsaṁ, āvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“More than a month.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ānando ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Ānanda complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū akālacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā atirekamāsaṁ nikkhipissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can these monks keep out-of-season robe-cloth for more than a month?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando te bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, Venerable Ānanda told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū akālacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā atirekamāsaṁ nikkhipantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that there are monks who do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā akālacīvaraṁ paṭiggahetvā atirekamāsaṁ nikkhipissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those foolish men keep out-of-season robe-cloth for more than a month? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Niṭṭhitacīvarasmiṁ bhikkhunā ubbhatasmiṁ kathine bhikkhuno paneva akālacīvaraṁ uppajjeyya, ākaṅkhamānena bhikkhunā paṭiggahetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When his robe is finished and the robe-making season has ended, if out-of-season robe-cloth is given to a monk, he may receive it if he wishes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggahetvā khippameva kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives it, he should quickly make a robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No cassa pāripūri, māsaparamaṁ tena bhikkhunā taṁ cīvaraṁ nikkhipitabbaṁ ūnassa pāripūriyā satiyā paccāsāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is not enough cloth, but he is expecting more, he should keep it at most one month to make up the lack. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari nikkhipeyya, satiyāpi paccāsāya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he keeps it beyond that, then even if he expects more cloth, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niṭṭhitacīvarasminti</span></p>
<p class="p3">When his robe is finished: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuno cīvaraṁ kataṁ vā hoti naṭṭhaṁ vā vinaṭṭhaṁ vā daḍḍhaṁ vā cīvarāsā vā upacchinnā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk has made a robe; or the robe-cloth has been lost, ruined, or burnt; or he has abandoned his expectation of receiving further robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhatasmiṁ kathineti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-making season has ended: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhannaṁ mātikānaṁ aññatarāya mātikāya ubbhataṁ hoti, saṅghena vā antarā ubbhataṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it has ended according to one of the eight summaries or the Sangha has ended it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akālacīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Out-of-season robe-cloth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthate kathine ekādasamāse uppannaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the robe-making procedure has not been done, robe-cloth that is given during the eleven months. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthate kathine sattamāse uppannaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the robe-making procedure has been done, robe-cloth that is given during the seven months. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kālepi ādissa dinnaṁ, etaṁ akālacīvaraṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Also, if it is given in the robe season, but the cloth is designated, it is called “out-of-season robe-cloth”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is given: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppajjeyya saṅghato vā gaṇato vā ñātito vā mittato vā paṁsukūlaṁ vā attano vā dhanena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is given by a Sangha, by a group, by a relative, or by a friend, or if it is rags, or if he got it by means of his own property. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkhamānenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he wishes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">icchamānena paṭiggahetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he desires, he may receive it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggahetvā khippameva kāretabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives it, he should quickly make a robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasāhā kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it should be made within ten days. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No cassa pāripūrīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there is not enough cloth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kayiramānaṁ nappahoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is not enough cloth when the robe is being made. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māsaparamaṁ tena bhikkhunā taṁ cīvaraṁ nikkhipitabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should keep it at most one month: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māsaparamatā nikkhipitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he should keep it one month at a maximum. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnassa pāripūriyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To make up the lack: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnassa pāripūratthāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the purpose of making up the lack. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satiyā paccāsāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">But he is expecting more: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccāsā hoti saṅghato vā gaṇato vā ñātito vā mittato vā paṁsukūlaṁ vā attano vā dhanena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is expecting more from a Sangha, from a group, from a relative, or from a friend, or he is expecting to get rags, or he is expecting to get it by means of his own property. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari nikkhipeyya satiyāpi paccāsāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he keeps it beyond that, then even if he expects more cloth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tadahuppanne mūlacīvare paccāsācīvaraṁ uppajjati, dasāhā kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is given the expected robe-cloth on the same day as he was given the original robe-cloth, it must be made into a robe within ten days. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhuppanne mūlacīvare paccāsācīvaraṁ uppajjati, dasāhā kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is given the expected robe-cloth the day after he was given the original robe-cloth, it must be made into a robe within ten days. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhuppanne mūlacīvare …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is given the expected robe-cloth two days after … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catūhuppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3">three days after … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcāhuppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chāhuppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattāhuppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhāhuppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">navāhuppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasāhuppanne mūlacīvare paccāsācīvaraṁ uppajjati, dasāhā kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādase uppanne …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvādase uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">terase uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cuddase uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pannarase uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">soḷase uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattarase uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhārase uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekūnavīse uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3">eighteen days after … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīse uppanne mūlacīvare paccāsācīvaraṁ uppajjati, dasāhā kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… nineteen days after he was given the original robe-cloth, it must be made into a robe within ten days. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekavīse uppanne mūlacīvare paccāsācīvaraṁ uppajjati, navāhā kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is given the expected robe-cloth twenty days after he was given the original robe-cloth, it must be made into a robe within nine days. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvāvīse uppanne …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is given the expected robe-cloth twenty-one days after he was given the original robe-cloth, it must be made into a robe within eight days. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tevīse uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3">twenty-two days after … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catuvīse uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcavīse uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chabbīse uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattavīse uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhavīse uppanne …</span></p>
<p class="p3">twenty-seven days after … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekūnatiṁse uppanne mūlacīvare paccāsācīvaraṁ uppajjati, ekāhaṁ kāretabbaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is given the expected robe-cloth twenty-eight days after he was given the original robe-cloth, it must be made into a robe within one day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṁse uppanne mūlacīvare paccāsācīvaraṁ uppajjati, tadaheva adhiṭṭhātabbaṁ vikappetabbaṁ vissajjetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is given the expected robe-cloth twenty-nine days after he was given the original robe-cloth, it must be determined, transferred to another, or given away on that very day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce adhiṭṭheyya vā vikappeyya vā vissajjeyya vā, ekatiṁse aruṇuggamane nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not determine it, transfer it to another, or give it away, it becomes subject to relinquishment at dawn on the thirtieth day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-cloth should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṁ me, bhante, akālacīvaraṁ māsātikkantaṁ nissaggiyaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this out-of-season robe-cloth, which I have kept for more than a month, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmīti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe-cloth back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visabhāge uppanne mūlacīvare paccāsācīvaraṁ uppajjati, rattiyo ca sesā honti, na akāmā kāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is given the expected robe-cloth, but it is different from the robe-cloth originally given to him, and there are days remaining, he does not have to make a robe if he does not want to. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māsātikkante atikkantasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than a month and he perceives it as more, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māsātikkante vematiko nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than a month, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māsātikkante anatikkantasaññī nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than a month, but he perceives it as less, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhiṭṭhite adhiṭṭhitasaññī …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been determined, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avikappite vikappitasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been transferred, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avissajjite vissajjitasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been given away, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anaṭṭhe naṭṭhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been lost, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avinaṭṭhe vinaṭṭhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been ruined, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adaḍḍhe daḍḍhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been burnt, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avilutte viluttasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been stolen, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyaṁ cīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he uses robe-cloth that should be relinquished without first relinquishing it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māsānatikkante atikkantasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than a month, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māsānatikkante vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than a month, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māsānatikkante anatikkantasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than a month and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antomāse adhiṭṭheti, vikappeti, vissajjeti, nassati, vinassati, ḍayhati, acchinditvā gaṇhanti, vissāsaṁ gaṇhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if within a month it has been determined, transferred to another, given away, lost, ruined, burnt, stolen, or taken on trust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyakathinasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third training rule on the robe-making season, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
