<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np30_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">30. Pariṇatasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">30. The training rule on what is intended </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṁ aññatarassa pūgassa saṅghassa sacīvarabhattaṁ paṭiyattaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">an association had prepared a meal together with robes for the Sangha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhojetvā cīvarena acchādessāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">intending to offer the robes after giving the meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū yena so pūgo tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the monks from the group of six went to that association </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā taṁ pūgaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dethāvuso, amhākaṁ imāni cīvarānī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please give these robes to us.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na mayaṁ, bhante, dassāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, we can’t do that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākaṁ saṅghassa anuvassaṁ sacīvarabhikkhā paññattā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">We’ve prepared our annual alms-offering together with robes for the Sangha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bahū, āvuso, saṅghassa dāyakā, bahū saṅghassa bhattā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Sangha has many donors and supporters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayaṁ tumhe nissāya tumhe sampassantā idha viharāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But since we’re staying here, we look to you for support. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhe ce amhākaṁ na dassatha, atha ko carahi amhākaṁ dassati?</span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t give to us, who will? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dethāvuso, amhākaṁ imāni cīvarānī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So give us these robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so pūgo chabbaggiyehi bhikkhūhi nippīḷiyamāno yathāpaṭiyattaṁ cīvaraṁ chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ datvā saṅghaṁ bhattena parivisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Being pressured by the monks from the group of six, that association gave the prepared robes to them and served the food to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū jānanti saṅghassa sacīvarabhattaṁ paṭiyattaṁ, na ca jānanti chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ dinnanti, te evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks who knew that a meal together with robes had been prepared for the Sangha, but who did not know that the robes had been given to the monks from the group of six, said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“oṇojethāvuso, saṅghassa cīvaran”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please offer the robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthi, bhante.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There aren’t any. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāpaṭiyattaṁ cīvaraṁ ayyā chabbaggiyā attano pariṇāmesun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six have diverted to themselves the robes we had prepared.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū jānaṁ saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇataṁ attano pariṇāmessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six divert to themselves things they know are intended for the Sangha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, jānaṁ saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇataṁ attano pariṇāmethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, jānaṁ saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇataṁ attano pariṇāmessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇataṁ attano pariṇāmeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk diverts to himself material support that he knows was intended for the Sangha, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti aññe vā tassa ārocenti so vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the donor has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghikaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghassa dinnaṁ hoti pariccattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">given to the Sangha, given up to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Material support: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārā. Antamaso cuṇṇapiṇḍopi, dantakaṭṭhampi, dasikasuttampi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">robes, almsfood, a dwelling, and medicines; even a bit of bath powder, a tooth cleaner, or a piece of string. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Intended: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dassāma karissāmāti vācā bhinnā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they have said, “We’ll give,” “We’ll prepare.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attano pariṇāmeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he diverts it to himself, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets it, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, jānaṁ saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇataṁ attano pariṇāmitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this thing, which I diverted to myself knowing that it was intended for the Sangha, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇate pariṇatasaññī attano pariṇāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for the Sangha and he perceives it as such, and he diverts it to himself, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇate vematiko attano pariṇāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for the Sangha, but he is unsure of it, and he diverts it to himself, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇate apariṇatasaññī attano pariṇāmeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for the Sangha, but he does not perceive it as such, and he diverts it to himself, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghassa pariṇataṁ aññasaṅghassa vā cetiyassa vā pariṇāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for one Sangha and he diverts it to another Sangha or to a shrine, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetiyassa pariṇataṁ aññacetiyassa vā saṅghassa vā puggalassa vā pariṇāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for one shrine and he diverts it to another shrine or to a sangha or to an individual, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalassa pariṇataṁ aññapuggalassa vā saṅghassa vā cetiyassa vā pariṇāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is intended for an individual and he diverts it to another individual or to a sangha or to a shrine, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apariṇate pariṇatasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not intended for the Sangha, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apariṇate vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not intended for the Sangha, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apariṇate apariṇatasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not intended for the Sangha and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kattha demāti pucchiyamāno yattha tumhākaṁ deyyadhammo paribhogaṁ vā labheyya paṭisaṅkhāraṁ vā labheyya ciraṭṭhitiko vā assa yattha vā pana tumhākaṁ cittaṁ pasīdati tattha dethāti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if being asked, “Where may we give?” he says, “Give where your gift goes toward equipment;” “Give where it goes toward repairs;” “Give where it will last for a long time;” “Give where you feel inspired;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pariṇatasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on what is intended, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavaggo tatiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third sub-chapter on almsbowls is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve ca pattāni bhesajjaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two on bowls, and tonics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vassikā dānapañcamaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Rainy season, the fifth on a gift; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmaṁ vāyāpanacceko,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Oneself, having woven, haste, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāsaṅkaṁ saṅghikena cāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Risky, and with the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Uddiṭṭhā kho, āyasmanto, tiṁsa nissaggiyā pācittiyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, the thirty rules on relinquishment and confession have been recited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyasmante pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In regard to this I ask you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kaccittha parisuddhā’?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kaccittha parisuddhā’?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kaccittha parisuddhā’?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhetthāyasmanto, tasmā tuṇhī,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You are pure in this and therefore silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametaṁ dhārayāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will remember it thus.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyakaṇḍaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The chapter on offenses entailing relinquishment is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikapāḷi niṭṭhitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The canonical text beginning with offenses entailing expulsion is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
