<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc73_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">73. Mohanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">73. The training rule on deception </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū anācāraṁ ācaritvā “aññāṇakena āpannāti jānantū”ti pātimokkhe uddissamāne evaṁ vadanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six were misbehaving. They said to each other, “Let’s make the other monks think that we committed these offenses because we didn’t know the rules.” Then, during the recitation of the Monastic Code, they said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idāneva kho mayaṁ jānāma, ayampi kira dhammo suttāgato suttapariyāpanno anvaddhamāsaṁ uddesaṁ āgacchatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just now did we find out that this rule too is included in the Monastic Code and comes up for recitation every half-month.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū pātimokkhe uddissamāne evaṁ vakkhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six say this during the recitation of the Monastic Code?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idāneva kho mayaṁ jānāma, ayampi kira dhammo suttāgato suttapariyāpanno anvaddhamāsaṁ uddesaṁ āgacchatī’”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, pātimokkhe uddissamāne evaṁ vadetha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you said this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idāneva kho mayaṁ jānāma, ayampi kira dhammo suttāgato suttapariyāpanno anvaddhamāsaṁ uddesaṁ āgacchatī’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, pātimokkhe uddissamāne evaṁ vakkhatha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you say this during the recitation of the Monastic Code? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idāneva kho mayaṁ jānāma, ayampi kira dhammo suttāgato suttapariyāpanno anvaddhamāsaṁ uddesaṁ āgacchatī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu anvaddhamāsaṁ pātimokkhe uddissamāne evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘During the half-monthly recitation of the Monastic Code, a monk might say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idāneva kho ahaṁ jānāmi, ayampi kira dhammo suttāgato suttapariyāpanno anvaddhamāsaṁ uddesaṁ āgacchatī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just now did I find out that this rule too has come down in the Monastic Code, is included in the Monastic Code, and comes up for recitation every half-month.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce bhikkhuṁ aññe bhikkhū jāneyyuṁ nisinnapubbaṁ iminā bhikkhunā dvattikkhattuṁ pātimokkhe uddissamāne, ko pana vādo bhiyyo, na ca tassa bhikkhuno aññāṇakena mutti atthi, yañca tattha āpattiṁ āpanno tañca yathādhammo kāretabbo, uttari cassa moho āropetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If other monks know that that monk has previously sat through at least two or three recitations of the Monastic Code, then that monk is not let off because of ignorance, and he is to be dealt with according to the rule. Further, he should be charged with deception: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tassa te, āvuso, alābhā, tassa te dulladdhaṁ, yaṁ tvaṁ pātimokkhe uddissamāne na sādhukaṁ aṭṭhiṁ katvā manasi karosī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s a loss for you that you don’t pay proper attention during the recitation of the Monastic Code.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṁ tasmiṁ mohanake pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And for the act of deception, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anvaddhamāsanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Half-monthly: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuposathikaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">on every observance day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pātimokkhe uddissamāneti</span></p>
<p class="p3">During the recitation of the Monastic Code: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddisante.</span></p>
<p class="p3">during the reciting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vadeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Might say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anācāraṁ ācaritvā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">after misbehaving, he thinks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aññāṇakena āpannoti jānantū”ti pātimokkhe uddissamāne evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Let them think that I committed these offenses because I didn’t know the rules.” If, during the recitation of the Monastic Code, he then says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idāneva kho ahaṁ jānāmi, ayampi kira dhammo suttāgato suttapariyāpanno anvaddhamāsaṁ uddesaṁ āgacchatī”ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just now did I find out that this rule too has come down in the Monastic Code, is included in the Monastic Code, and comes up for recitation every half-month,” then he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce mohetukāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ aññe bhikkhū jāneyyuṁ nisinnapubbaṁ iminā bhikkhunā dvattikkhattuṁ pātimokkhe uddissamāne, ko pana vādo bhiyyo, na ca tassa bhikkhuno aññāṇakena mutti atthi, yañca tattha āpattiṁ āpanno, tañca yathādhammo kāretabbo, uttari cassa moho āropetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If other monks know that the monk who wants to deceive has previously sat through at least two or three recitations of the Monastic Code, then that monk is not let off because of ignorance, and he is to be dealt with according to the rule. Further, he should be charged with deception: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, āropetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, he is to be charged like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable monk should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu pātimokkhe uddissamāne na sādhukaṁ aṭṭhiṁ katvā manasi karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk so-and-so did not pay proper attention during the recitation of the Monastic Code. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmassa bhikkhuno mohaṁ āropeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should charge him with deception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu pātimokkhe uddissamāne na sādhukaṁ aṭṭhiṁ katvā manasi karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk so-and-so did not pay proper attention during the recitation of the Monastic Code. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmassa bhikkhuno mohaṁ āropeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha charges him with deception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno mohassa āropanā, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of charging him with deception should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āropito saṅghena itthannāmassa bhikkhuno moho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has charged monk so-and-so with deception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāropite mohe moheti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he deceives, but he has not been charged with deception, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āropite mohe moheti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he deceives, and he has been charged with deception, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī moheti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as legitimate, and he deceives, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko moheti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, and he deceives, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī moheti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as illegitimate, and he deceives, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as legitimate, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vitthārena sutaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has not heard it in full; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakadvattikkhattuṁ vitthārena sutaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has heard it fewer than two or three times in full; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na mohetukāmassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not want to deceive; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mohanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on deception, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
