<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc35_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on eating </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">35. Pavāraṇāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">35. The training rule on invitations </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro brāhmaṇo bhikkhū nimantetvā bhojesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain brahmin had invited the monks for a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhuttāvī pavāritā ñātikulāni gantvā ekacce bhuñjiṁsu ekacce piṇḍapātaṁ ādāya agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the monks had finished and refused an invitation to eat more, they went to their respective families, where some ate and some took away almsfood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo paṭivissake etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards that brahmin said to his neighbors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhū mayā, ayyā, santappitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The monks have been satisfied by me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etha, tumhepi santappessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Come, and I’ll satisfy you, too.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṁsu—“kiṁ tvaṁ, ayyo, amhe santappessasi?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could you satisfy us? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi tayā nimantitā tepi amhākaṁ gharāni āgantvā ekacce bhuñjiṁsu ekacce piṇḍapātaṁ ādāya agamaṁsū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those monks who were invited by you came to our houses. Some of them ate there and some took away almsfood.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That brahmin complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhadantā amhākaṁ ghare bhuñjitvā aññatra bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the venerables eat in our house and afterwards eat elsewhere? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāhaṁ paṭibalo yāvadatthaṁ dātun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Am I not able to give them as much as they need?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa brāhmaṇassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū bhuttāvī pavāritā aññatra bhuñjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those monks finish their meal and refuse an invitation to eat more, and then eat elsewhere?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū bhuttāvī pavāritā aññatra bhuñjantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that monks did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā bhuttāvī pavāritā aññatra bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhuttāvī pavārito khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has finished his meal and refused an invitation to eat more, and then eats fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū gilānānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ paṇīte piṇḍapāte nīharanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the monks were bringing back fine almsfood for the sick monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā na cittarūpaṁ bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But because the sick monks were unable to eat as much as they had intended, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni bhikkhū chaṭṭenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks threw the leftovers away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosi kho bhagavā uccāsaddaṁ mahāsaddaṁ kākoravasaddaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Buddha heard the loud sound of crows cawing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvāna āyasmantaṁ ānandaṁ āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he asked Venerable Ānanda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ nu kho so, ānanda, uccāsaddo mahāsaddo kākoravasaddo”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, why is there this loud sound of crows cawing?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda told him what had happened, and the Buddha said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhuñjeyyuṁ panānanda, bhikkhū gilānātirittan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Ānanda, don’t the monks eat the leftovers from those who are sick?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na bhuñjeyyuṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānassa ca agilānassa ca atirittaṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to eat the leftovers both from those who are sick and from those who are not sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, atirittaṁ kātabbaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, this is how you make food leftover: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘alametaṁ sabban’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I don’t need of any of this.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhuttāvī pavārito anatirittaṁ khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has finished his meal and refused an invitation to eat more, and then eats fresh or cooked food that is not left over, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhuttāvī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has finished his meal: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññataraṁ bhojanaṁ antamaso kusaggenapi bhuttaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">has eaten any of the five cooked foods, even what fits on the tip of a blade of grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavārito nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Refused an invitation to eat more: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asanaṁ paññāyati, bhojanaṁ paññāyati, hatthapāse ṭhito abhiharati, paṭikkhepo paññāyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is eating; there is cooked food; it is offered by one standing within arm’s reach; there is a refusal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anatirittaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not left over: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akappiyakataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">the making it leftover is done with food that is unallowable; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appaṭiggahitakataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done with food that has not been received; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuccāritakataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done with food that is not held in hand; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahatthapāse kataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done by one who is not within arm’s reach; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhuttāvinā kataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done by one who has not finished his meal; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhuttāvinā pavāritena āsanā vuṭṭhitena kataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done by one who has finished his meal, who has refused an invitation to eat more, but who has risen from his seat; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alametaṁ sabban”ti avuttaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t need of any of this,” has not been said; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na gilānātirittaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is not leftover from one who is sick—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etaṁ anatirittaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called “not leftover”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirittaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Left over: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kappiyakataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">the making it leftover is done with food that is allowable; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭiggahitakataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done with food that has been received; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uccāritakataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done with food that is held in hand; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthapāse kataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done by one who is within arm’s reach; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhuttāvinā kataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done by one who has finished his meal; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhuttāvinā pavāritena āsanā avuṭṭhitena kataṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is done by one who has finished his meal, who has refused an invitation to eat more, and who has not risen from his seat; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alametaṁ sabban”ti vuttaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t need of any of this,” has been said; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānātirittaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is leftover from one who is sick—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etaṁ atirittaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called “leftover”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, the post-midday tonics, the seven-day tonics, and the lifetime tonics—the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni— odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives it intending to eat it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anatiritte anatirittasaññī khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not leftover, and he does not perceive it as such, and he eats fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anatiritte vematiko khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not leftover, but he is unsure of it, and he eats fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anatiritte atirittasaññī khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not leftover, but he perceives it as such, and he eats fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ āhāratthāya paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics for the purpose of food, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atiritte anatirittasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is leftover, but he does not perceive it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atiritte vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is leftover, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atiritte atirittasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is leftover, and he perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atirittaṁ kārāpetvā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats it after having it made leftover; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atirittaṁ kārāpetvā bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he receives it with the intention of having it made leftover and then eating it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya haranto gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is taking food for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa sesakaṁ bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats the leftovers from a sick person; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ sati paccaye paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when there is a reason, he uses post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavāraṇāsikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on invitations, the fifth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
