<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc26_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">26. Cīvarasibbanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">26. The training rule on sewing robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā udāyī paṭṭo hoti cīvarakammaṁ kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Udāyī had become skilled in making robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatarā bhikkhunī yenāyasmā udāyī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion a certain nun went to Udāyī and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu me, bhante, ayyo cīvaraṁ sibbatū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, would you please sew me a robe?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī tassā bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ sibbitvā surattaṁ suparikammakataṁ katvā majjhe paṭibhānacittaṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā saṁharitvā nikkhipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then sewed a robe for that nun, well-dyed and beautifully executed, and he drew a picture in the middle of it. He then folded it and put it aside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī yenāyasmā udāyī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards that nun went to Udāyī and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kahaṁ taṁ, bhante, cīvaran”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, where’s the robe?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Handa, bhagini, imaṁ cīvaraṁ yathāsaṁhaṭaṁ haritvā nikkhipitvā yadā bhikkhunisaṅgho ovādaṁ āgacchati tadā imaṁ cīvaraṁ pārupitvā bhikkhunisaṅghassa piṭṭhito piṭṭhito āgacchā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Now, Sister, take this robe as it’s folded and put it aside. When the Sangha of nuns goes to the instruction, then put it on and follow right behind the other nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī taṁ cīvaraṁ yathāsaṁhaṭaṁ haritvā nikkhipitvā yadā bhikkhunisaṅgho ovādaṁ āgacchati tadā taṁ cīvaraṁ pārupitvā bhikkhunisaṅghassa piṭṭhito piṭṭhito āgacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And that nun did just that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāva chinnikā imā bhikkhuniyo dhuttikā ahirikāyo, yatra hi nāma cīvare paṭibhānacittaṁ vuṭṭhāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How indecent these nuns are, what shameless scoundrels, seeing as they draw pictures on their robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns asked her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kassidaṁ kamman”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayyassa udāyissā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Udāyī.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yepi te chinnakā dhuttakā ahirikā tesampi evarūpaṁ na sobheyya, kiṁ pana ayyassa udāyissā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This sort of work would not even make an indecent, shameless scoundrel look good, let alone Venerable Udāyī.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā udāyī bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ sibbissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Udāyī sew a robe for a nun?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, udāyi, bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ sibbasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Udāyī, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ñātikā te, udāyi, aññātikā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is she a relative of yours?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātikā, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātako, moghapurisa, aññātikāya na jānāti patirūpaṁ vā appatirūpaṁ vā pāsādikaṁ vā apāsādikaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, a man and a woman who are unrelated don’t know what’s appropriate and inappropriate, what’s inspiring and uninspiring, in dealing with each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, aññātikāya bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ sibbissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu aññātikāya bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ sibbeyya vā sibbāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk sews a robe for an unrelated nun, or has one sewn, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unrelated: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātito vā pitito vā yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā asambaddhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who is not a descendant of one’s male ancestors going back seven generations, either on the mother’s side or on the father’s side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sibbeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sews: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ sibbati ārāpathe ārāpathe āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sews it himself, then for each stitch he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sibbāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has sewn: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks another, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇatto bahukampi sibbati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he only asks once, then even if the other sews a lot, he commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī cīvaraṁ sibbati vā sibbāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he sews her a robe or has one sewn, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya vematiko cīvaraṁ sibbati vā sibbāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated, but he is unsure of it, and he sews her a robe or has one sewn, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya ñātikasaññī cīvaraṁ sibbati vā sibbāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated, but he perceives her as related, and he sews her a robe or has one sewn, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoupasampannāya cīvaraṁ sibbati vā sibbāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he sews a robe, or has one sewn, for a nun who is fully ordained only on one side, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya aññātikasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related, but he perceives her as unrelated, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya ñātikasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related and he perceives her as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is related; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvaraṁ ṭhapetvā aññaṁ parikkhāraṁ sibbati vā sibbāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sews any requisite apart from a robe, or has it sewn; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhamānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a trainee nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇeriyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a novice nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvarasibbanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on sewing robes, the sixth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
