<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc79_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">79. Kammapaṭibāhanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">79. The training rule on obstructing a legal procedure </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū anācāraṁ ācaritvā ekamekassa kamme kayiramāne paṭikkosanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six were misbehaving, but when a legal procedure was being done against any one of them, they would object. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena saṅgho sannipatito hoti kenacideva karaṇīyena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion the Sangha had gathered on some business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū cīvarakammaṁ karontā ekassa chandaṁ adaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six were busy making robes and so they gave their consent to one among them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho saṅgho—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ, āvuso, chabbaggiyo bhikkhu ekako āgato, handassa mayaṁ kammaṁ karomā”ti tassa kammaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the monks saw that only one monk from the group of six had come, they did a legal procedure against him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu yena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he returned to the monks from the group of six, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">they asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ, āvuso, saṅgho akāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What did the Sangha do?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saṅgho me, āvuso, kammaṁ akāsī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It did a legal procedure against me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na mayaṁ, āvuso, etadatthāya chandaṁ adamhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We didn’t give our consent for that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tuyhaṁ kammaṁ karissatī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace ca mayaṁ jāneyyāma ‘tuyhaṁ kammaṁ karissatī’ti, na mayaṁ chandaṁ dadeyyāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If we had known that a procedure would be done against you, we wouldn’t have given our consent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū dhammikānaṁ kammānaṁ chandaṁ datvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six give their consent to legitimate legal procedures and then criticize them afterwards?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, dhammikānaṁ kammānaṁ chandaṁ datvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, dhammikānaṁ kammānaṁ chandaṁ datvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu dhammikānaṁ kammānaṁ chandaṁ datvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk gives his consent to legitimate legal procedures, and then criticizes them afterwards, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammikaṁ nāma kammaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legitimate legal procedure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apalokanakammaṁ ñattikammaṁ ñattidutiyakammaṁ ñatticatutthakammaṁ dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena kataṁ, etaṁ dhammikaṁ nāma kammaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a legal procedure consisting of getting permission, a legal procedure consisting of one motion, a legal procedure consisting of one motion and one announcement, a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements; done according to the Teaching, according to the Monastic Law, according to the Teacher’s instruction. This is called a “legitimate legal procedure”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandaṁ datvā khiyyati āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gives his consent, and then criticizes the procedure, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī chandaṁ datvā khiyyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, and he criticizes it after giving his consent, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko chandaṁ datvā khiyyati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, and he criticizes it after giving his consent, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī chandaṁ datvā khiyyati, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as illegitimate, and he criticizes it after giving his consent, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as legitimate, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“adhammena vā vaggena vā na kammārahassa vā kammaṁ katan”ti jānanto khiyyati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he criticizes it because he knows that the legal procedure was illegitimate, done by an incomplete assembly, or done against one who did not deserve it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammapaṭibāhanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on obstructing a legal procedure, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
