<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc41_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on naked ascetics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">41. Acelakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">41. The training rule on naked ascetics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā vesāliyaṁ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood near Vesālī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena saṅghassa khādanīyaṁ ussannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha had an abundance of fresh food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi. “Tenahānanda, vighāsādānaṁ pūvaṁ dehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Ānanda told the Buddha, who said, “Well then, Ānanda, give the pastries to those who take leftovers.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paṭissuṇitvā vighāsāde paṭipāṭiyā nisīdāpetvā ekekaṁ pūvaṁ dento aññatarissā paribbājikāya ekaṁ maññamāno dve pūve adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, Sir.” Ānanda had them sit in a row and gave them one pastry each, until he accidentally gave two to a female wanderer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmantā paribbājikāyo taṁ paribbājikaṁ etadavocuṁ—“jāro te eso samaṇo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The female wanderers sitting next to her said to her, “This monastic is your lover.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me so samaṇo jāro, ekaṁ maññamāno dve pūve adāsī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“He’s not. He gave me two, thinking they were one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">And a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho āyasmā ānando ekekaṁ pūvaṁ dento tassāyeva paribbājikāya ekaṁ maññamāno dve pūve adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And a third time Ānanda gave them one pastry each, until he accidentally gave two to that same female wanderer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmantā paribbājikāyo taṁ paribbājikaṁ etadavocuṁ—“jāro te eso samaṇo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Once again the female wanderers sitting next to her said to her, “This monastic is your lover.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me so samaṇo jāro, ekaṁ maññamāno dve pūve adāsī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“He’s not. He gave me two, thinking they were one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jāro na jāro”ti bhaṇḍiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they started to argue about whether or not they were lovers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataropi ājīvako parivesanaṁ agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A certain Ājīvaka ascetic, too, went to that distribution of food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro bhikkhu pahūtena sappinā odanaṁ madditvā tassa ājīvakassa mahantaṁ piṇḍaṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk mixed rice with a large amount of ghee and gave him a large lump. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so ājīvako taṁ piṇḍaṁ ādāya agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He took it and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro ājīvako taṁ ājīvakaṁ etadavoca—“kuto tayā, āvuso, piṇḍo laddho”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Another Ājīvaka asked him, “Where did you get that lump?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tassāvuso, samaṇassa gotamassa muṇḍagahapatikassa parivesanāya laddho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“From the food distribution of the ascetic Gotama, that shaven-headed householder.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho upāsakā tesaṁ ājīvakānaṁ imaṁ kathāsallāpaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Some lay followers overheard that conversation between those Ājīvaka ascetics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te upāsakā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdiṁsu. Ekamantaṁ nisinnā kho te upāsakā bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ime, bhante, titthiyā avaṇṇakāmā buddhassa avaṇṇakāmā dhammassa avaṇṇakāmā saṅghassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Sir, these monastics of other religions want to disparage the Buddha, the Teaching, and the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhante, ayyā titthiyānaṁ sahatthā na dadeyyun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It would be good if the monks didn’t give anything to the monastics of other religions with their own hands.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā te upāsake dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṁsesi. Atha kho te upāsakā bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṁsitā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the Buddha had instructed, inspired, and gladdened those lay followers with a teaching, they got up from their seats, bowed down, circumambulated him with their right side toward him, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tena hi, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññapessāmi dasa atthavase paṭicca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, monks, I will lay down a training rule for the following ten reasons: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghasuṭṭhutāya, saṅghaphāsutāya …pe… saddhammaṭṭhitiyā, vinayānuggahāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for the well-being of the Sangha, for the comfort of the Sangha, for the restraint of bad people, for the ease of well-behaved monks, for the restraint of corruptions relating to the present life, for the restraint of corruptions relating to future lives, to give rise to confidence in those without it, to increase the confidence of those who have it, for the longevity of the true Teaching, and for supporting the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu acelakassa vā paribbājakassa vā paribbājikāya vā sahatthā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā dadeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk gives fresh or cooked food to a naked ascetic, to a male wanderer, or to a female wanderer with his own hands, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A naked ascetic: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci paribbājakasamāpanno naggo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any wanderer who is naked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribbājako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A male wanderer: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuñca sāmaṇerañca ṭhapetvā yo koci paribbājakasamāpanno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any male wanderer apart from Buddhist monks and novice monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribbājikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A female wanderer: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuniñca sikkhamānañca sāmaṇeriñca ṭhapetvā yā kāci paribbājikasamāpannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any female wanderer apart from Buddhist nuns, trainee nuns, and novice nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—udakadantaponaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, water, and tooth cleaners, the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena vā kāyapaṭibaddhena vā nissaggiyena vā deti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives by body or by what is connected to the body or by releasing, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Titthiye titthiyasaññī sahatthā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā deti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a monastic of another religion, and he perceives them as such, and he gives them fresh or cooked food with his own hands, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Titthiye vematiko sahatthā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā deti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a monastic of another religion, but he is unsure of it, and he gives them fresh or cooked food with his own hands, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Titthiye atitthiyasaññī sahatthā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā deti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a monastic of another religion, but he does not perceive them as such, and he gives them fresh or cooked food with his own hands, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakadantaponaṁ deti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gives water or a tooth cleaner, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atitthiye titthiyasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a monastic of another religion, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atitthiye vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a monastic of another religion, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atitthiye atitthiyasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a monastic of another religion, and he does not perceive them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāpeti na deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not give, but has it given; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanikkhipitvā deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives by placing it near the person; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bāhirālepaṁ deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives ointments for external use; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on naked ascetics, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
