<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc47_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on naked monastics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">47. Mahānāmasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">47. The training rule on Mahānāma </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṁ nigrodhārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the Sakyan country in the Banyan Tree Monastery at Kapilavatthu. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena mahānāmassa sakkassa bhesajjaṁ ussannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Mahānāma the Sakyan had an abundance of tonics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahānāmo sakko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho mahānāmo sakko bhagavantaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“icchāmahaṁ, bhante, saṅghaṁ catumāsaṁ bhesajjena pavāretun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Sir, I wish to invite the Sangha to ask for tonics for four months.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, mahānāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Mahānāma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena hi tvaṁ, mahānāma, saṅghaṁ catumāsaṁ bhesajjena pavārehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please do so.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū kukkuccāyantā nādhivāsenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the monks were afraid of wrongdoing and did not accept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then told the Buddha what had happened. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, catumāsaṁ bhesajjappaccayapavāraṇaṁ sāditun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to accept an invitation to ask for tonics for four months.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū mahānāmaṁ sakkaṁ parittaṁ bhesajjaṁ viññāpenti. Tatheva mahānāmassa sakkassa bhesajjaṁ ussannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet the monks only asked Mahānāma for a small amount of tonics, and so he still had an abundance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho mahānāmo sakko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho mahānāmo sakko bhagavantaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“icchāmahaṁ, bhante, saṅghaṁ aparampi catumāsaṁ bhesajjena pavāretun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I wish to invite the Sangha to ask for tonics for a further four months.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, mahānāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Mahānāma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena hi tvaṁ, mahānāma, saṅghaṁ aparampi catumāsaṁ bhesajjena pavārehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please do so.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū kukkuccāyantā nādhivāsenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Again the monks were afraid of wrongdoing and did not accept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, puna pavāraṇampi sāditun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to accept a further invitation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū mahānāmaṁ sakkaṁ parittaṁyeva bhesajjaṁ viññāpenti. Tatheva mahānāmassa sakkassa bhesajjaṁ ussannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Once again the monks only asked Mahānāma for a small amount of tonics, and so he still had an abundance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho mahānāmo sakko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho mahānāmo sakko bhagavantaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“icchāmahaṁ, bhante, saṅghaṁ yāvajīvaṁ bhesajjena pavāretun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I wish to invite the Sangha to ask for tonics for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, mahānāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Mahānāma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena hi tvaṁ, mahānāma, saṅghaṁ yāvajīvaṁ bhesajjena pavārehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please do so.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū kukkuccāyantā nādhivāsenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet again the monks were afraid of wrongdoing and did not accept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, niccapavāraṇampi sāditun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to accept a permanent invitation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū dunnivatthā honti duppārutā anākappasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six were shabbily dressed and improper in appearance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahānāmo sakko vattā hoti—“kissa tumhe, bhante, dunnivatthā duppārutā anākappasampannā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahānāma criticized them, “Venerables, why are you shabbily dressed and improper in appearance? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nanu nāma pabbajitena sunivatthena bhavitabbaṁ supārutena ākappasampannenā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Shouldn’t one who has gone forth be suitably dressed and proper in appearance?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū mahānāme sakke upanandhiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six developed a grudge against Mahānāma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ etadahosi—“kena nu kho mayaṁ upāyena mahānāmaṁ sakkaṁ maṅkuṁ kareyyāmā”ti? Atha kho chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking of ways to humiliate him, it occurred to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahānāmena kho, āvuso, sakkena saṅgho bhesajjena pavārito. Handa mayaṁ, āvuso, mahānāmaṁ sakkaṁ sappiṁ viññāpemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mahānāma has invited the Sangha to ask for tonics. Let’s ask him for ghee.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū yena mahānāmo sakko tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā mahānāmaṁ sakkaṁ etadavocuṁ—“doṇena, āvuso, sappinā attho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then went to Mahānāma and said, “We need a _doṇa_ measure of ghee.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjaṇho, bhante, āgametha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please wait until tomorrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā vajaṁ gatā sappiṁ āharituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">People have gone to the cow-pen to get ghee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālaṁ āharissathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You may come and get it in the morning.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū mahānāmaṁ sakkaṁ etadavocuṁ—“doṇena, āvuso, sappinā attho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time the monks from the group of six said the same thing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjaṇho, bhante, āgametha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and Mahānāma replied as before. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā vajaṁ gatā sappiṁ āharituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālaṁ āharissathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ pana tayā, āvuso, adātukāmena pavāritena, yaṁ tvaṁ pavāretvā na desī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then said, “Why do you give an invitation if you don’t wish to give?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahānāmo sakko ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—“kathañhi nāma bhadantā—‘ajjaṇho, bhante, āgamethā’ti vuccamānā nāgamessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahānāma complained and criticized them, “How can they not wait for one day when asked?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū mahānāmassa sakkassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of Mahānāma, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū mahānāmena sakkena—‘ajjaṇho, bhante, āgamethā’ti vuccamānā nāgamessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six not wait for one day when asked by Mahānāma?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, mahānāmena sakkena—‘ajjaṇho, bhante, āgamethā’ti vuccamānā nāgamethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you acted like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, mahānāmena sakkena—“ajjaṇho, bhante, āgamethā”ti vuccamānā nāgamessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Agilānena bhikkhunā catumāsappaccayapavāraṇā sāditabbā, aññatra punapavāraṇāya, aññatra niccapavāraṇāya; tato ce uttari sādiyeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A monk who is not sick may accept an invitation to ask for requisites for four months. If he accepts one beyond that limit, except if it is a further invitation or a permanent invitation, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānena bhikkhunā catumāsappaccayapavāraṇā sāditabbāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk who is not sick may accept an invitation to ask for requisites for four months: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānappaccayapavāraṇā sāditabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he may accept an invitation to ask for requisites for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Punapavāraṇāpi sāditabbāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He may also accept a further invitation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadā gilāno bhavissāmi tadā viññāpessāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he should think, “I’ll ask when I’m sick.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niccapavāraṇāpi sāditabbāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He may also accept a permanent invitation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yadā gilāno bhavissāmi tadā viññāpessāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he should think, “I’ll ask when I’m sick.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari sādiyeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he accepts one beyond that limit: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi pavāraṇā bhesajjapariyantā na rattipariyantā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are invitations that have a limit on the tonics, but no limit on the time period; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi pavāraṇā rattipariyantā na bhesajjapariyantā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are invitations that have a limit on the time period, but no limit on the tonics; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi pavāraṇā bhesajjapariyantā ca rattipariyantā ca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are invitations that have a limit on both the tonics and the time period; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi pavāraṇā neva bhesajjapariyantā na rattipariyantā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are invitations that have neither a limit on the tonics nor on the time period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhesajjapariyantā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Limit on the tonics: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhesajjāni pariggahitāni honti—“ettakehi bhesajjehi pavāremī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the tonics are restricted: “I invite you to ask for these particular tonics.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattipariyantā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Limit on the time period: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattiyo pariggahitāyo honti—“ettakāsu rattīsu pavāremī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the time period is restricted: “I invite you to ask during this particular period of time.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhesajjapariyantā ca rattipariyantā ca nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Limit on both the tonics and the time period: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhesajjāni ca pariggahitāni honti rattiyo ca pariggahitāyo honti—“ettakehi bhesajjehi ettakāsu rattīsu pavāremī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">both the tonics and the time period are restricted: “I invite you to ask for these particular tonics during this particular period of time.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva bhesajjapariyantā na rattipariyantā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Neither a limit on the tonics nor on the time period: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhesajjāni ca apariggahitāni honti rattiyo ca apariggahitāyo honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">neither the tonics nor the time period is restricted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhesajjapariyante—yehi bhesajjehi pavārito hoti tāni bhesajjāni ṭhapetvā aññāni bhesajjāni viññāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is a limit on the tonics, if he asks for tonics other than those he has been invited to ask for, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattipariyante—yāsu rattīsu pavārito hoti, tā rattiyo ṭhapetvā aññāsu rattīsu viññāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is a limit on the time period, if he asks outside of the period during which he has been invited to ask, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhesajjapariyante ca rattipariyante ca—yehi bhesajjehi pavārito hoti, tāni bhesajjāni ṭhapetvā yāsu rattīsu pavārito hoti, tā rattiyo ṭhapetvā aññāni bhesajjāni aññāsu rattīsu viññāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is a limit on both the tonics and on the time period, if he asks for tonics other than those he has been invited to ask for and he asks outside of the period during which he has been invited to ask, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva bhesajjapariyante na rattipariyante, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is neither a limit on the tonics nor on the time period, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na bhesajjena karaṇīyena bhesajjaṁ viññāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he asks for tonics when he has no need for tonics, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena bhesajjena karaṇīyena aññaṁ bhesajjaṁ viññāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he asks for a tonic other than the tonic he needs, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatuttari tatuttarisaññī bhesajjaṁ viññāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is beyond the limit, and he perceives it as such, and he asks for tonics, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatuttari vematiko bhesajjaṁ viññāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is beyond the limit, but he is unsure of it, and he asks for tonics, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatuttari natatuttarisaññī bhesajjaṁ viññāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is beyond the limit, but he does not perceive it as such, and he asks for tonics, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natatuttari tatuttarisaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not beyond the limit, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natatuttari vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not beyond the limit, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Natatuttari natatuttarisaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not beyond the limit, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yehi bhesajjehi pavārito hoti tāni bhesajjāni viññāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks for those tonics for which he was invited to ask; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāsu rattīsu pavārito hoti tāsu rattīsu viññāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks during the time period for which he was invited to ask; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imehi tayā bhesajjehi pavāritāmha, amhākañca iminā ca iminā ca bhesajjena attho”ti ācikkhitvā viññāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks by informing, “You have invited me to ask for these tonics, but I need such-and-such a tonic;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāsu tayā rattīsu pavāritāmha tāyo ca rattiyo vītivattā amhākañca bhesajjena attho”ti ācikkhitvā viññāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks by informing, “The time period during which you invited me to ask has passed, but I need tonics;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of his own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahānāmasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on Mahānāma, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
