<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np19_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on silk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">19. Rūpiyasaṁvohārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">19. The training rule on trading with money </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū nānappakārakaṁ rūpiyasaṁvohāraṁ samāpajjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six traded with money in various ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā nānappakārakaṁ rūpiyasaṁvohāraṁ samāpajjissanti, seyyathāpi gihī kāmabhogino”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics trade with money? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū nānappakārakaṁ rūpiyasaṁvohāraṁ samāpajjissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, nānappakārakaṁ rūpiyasaṁvohāraṁ samāpajjathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, nānappakārakaṁ rūpiyasaṁvohāraṁ samāpajjissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu nānappakārakaṁ rūpiyasaṁvohāraṁ samāpajjeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk trades with money in various ways, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānappakārakaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Various ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katampi akatampi katākatampi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what is shaped, what is not shaped, and what is both shaped and not shaped. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is shaped: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīsūpagaṁ gīvūpagaṁ hatthūpagaṁ pādūpagaṁ kaṭūpagaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what is meant for the head, what is meant for the neck, what is meant for the hands, what is meant for the feet, what is meant for the waist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is not shaped: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghanakataṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what is shaped in a lump is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katākataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">What is both shaped and not shaped: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tadubhayaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">both of them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Money: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthuvaṇṇo kahāpaṇo, lohamāsako, dārumāsako, jatumāsako ye vohāraṁ gacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a golden _kahāpaṇa_ coin, a copper _māsaka_ coin, a wooden _māsaka_ coin, a resin _māsaka_ coin—whatever is used in commerce. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samāpajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Trades: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katena kataṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he exchanges what is shaped with what is shaped, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katena akataṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges what is not shaped with what is shaped, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katena katākataṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges what is both shaped and not shaped with what is shaped, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akatena kataṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges what is shaped with what is not shaped, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akatena akataṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges what is not shaped with what is not shaped, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akatena katākataṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges what is both shaped and not shaped with what is not shaped, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katākatena kataṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges what is shaped with what is both shaped and not shaped, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katākatena akataṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges what is not shaped with what is both shaped and not shaped, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katākatena katākataṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he exchanges what is both shaped and not shaped with what is both shaped and not shaped, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghamajjhe nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It should be relinquished in the midst of the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha, that monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior monks. He should then squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṁ, bhante, nānappakārakaṁ rūpiyasaṁvohāraṁ samāpajjiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, I have traded with money in various ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṁ me nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, he is to confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena āpatti paṭiggahetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by a competent and capable monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace tattha āgacchati ārāmiko vā upāsako vā so vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monastery worker or a lay follower is available, you should tell him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āvuso, imaṁ jānāhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Look into this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace so bhaṇati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“iminā kiṁ āhariyyatū”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What can I get you with this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">one should not say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ vā imaṁ vā āharā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get this or that;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kappiyaṁ ācikkhitabbaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">one should point out what is allowable: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappi vā telaṁ vā madhu vā phāṇitaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">ghee, oil, honey, or syrup. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace so tena parivattetvā kappiyaṁ āharati, rūpiyacetāpakaṁ ṭhapetvā, sabbeheva paribhuñjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes a purchase and brings back what is allowable, everyone may enjoy it except the one who did the exchange into money. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcetaṁ labhetha, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If this is what happens, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce labhetha, so vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If not, he should be told, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āvuso, imaṁ chaḍḍehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Discard this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace so chaḍḍeti, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he discards it, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce chaḍḍeti, pañcahaṅgehi samannāgato bhikkhu rūpiyachaḍḍako sammannitabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not, a monk who has five qualities should be appointed as the money discarder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo na chandāgatiṁ gaccheyya, na dosāgatiṁ gaccheyya, na mohāgatiṁ gaccheyya, na bhayāgatiṁ gaccheyya, chaḍḍitāchaḍḍitañca jāneyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who is not swayed by desire, ill will, confusion, or fear, and who knows what has and has not been discarded. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, sammannitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this is how he should be appointed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṁ bhikkhu yācitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">First the monk should be asked </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yācitvā byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and then a competent and capable monk should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ rūpiyachaḍḍakaṁ sammanneyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, it should appoint monk so-and-so as the money discarder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ rūpiyachaḍḍakaṁ sammannati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha appoints monk so-and-so as the money discarder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno rūpiyachaḍḍakassa sammuti, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who agrees to appointing monk so-and-so as the money discarder should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who doesn’t agree should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammato saṅghena itthannāmo bhikkhu rūpiyachaḍḍako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has appointed monk so-and-so as the money discarder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena sammatena bhikkhunā animittaṁ katvā pātetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The appointed monk should throw it away without taking note of the location. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace nimittaṁ katvā pāteti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes note of where he throws it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiye rūpiyasaññī rūpiyaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is money, and he perceives it as such, and he exchanges it into money, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiye vematiko rūpiyaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is money, but he is unsure of it, and he exchanges it into money, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiye arūpiyasaññī rūpiyaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is money, but he does not perceive it as such, and he exchanges it into money, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpiye rūpiyasaññī rūpiyaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not money, but he perceives it as such, and he exchanges it into money, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpiye vematiko rūpiyaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not money, but he is unsure of it, and he exchanges it into money, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpiye arūpiyasaññī rūpiyaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not money, and he does not perceive it as such, but he exchanges it into money, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpiye rūpiyasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not money, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpiye vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not money, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpiye arūpiyasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not money, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiyasaṁvohārasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on trading with money, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
