<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc59_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on drinking alcohol </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">59. Vikappanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">59. The training rule on transferring to another </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto bhātuno saddhivihārikassa bhikkhuno sāmaṁ cīvaraṁ vikappetvā appaccuddhāraṇaṁ paribhuñjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Upananda the Sakyan had transferred a robe to a monk who was his brother’s student. He then used that robe without that monk having relinquished it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ, āvuso, āyasmā upanando sakyaputto mayhaṁ cīvaraṁ sāmaṁ vikappetvā appaccuddhāraṇaṁ paribhuñjatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Upananada is using a robe that he has transferred to me, even though I haven’t relinquished it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto bhikkhussa sāmaṁ cīvaraṁ vikappetvā appaccuddhāraṇaṁ paribhuñjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Upananda use a robe he has transferred, without the other monk relinquishing it?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, bhikkhussa sāmaṁ cīvaraṁ vikappetvā appaccuddhāraṇaṁ paribhuñjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, bhikkhussa sāmaṁ cīvaraṁ vikappetvā appaccuddhāraṇaṁ paribhuñjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā sikkhamānāya vā sāmaṇerassa vā sāmaṇeriyā vā sāmaṁ cīvaraṁ vikappetvā appaccuddhāraṇaṁ paribhuñjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk himself transfers a robe to a monk, to a nun, to a trainee nun, to a novice monk, or to a novice nun, and he then uses it without it first being relinquished, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhussāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To a monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa bhikkhussa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to another monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhamānā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A trainee nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one training for two years in the six rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmaṇero nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A novice monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasasikkhāpadiko.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a male training in the ten training rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmaṇerī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A novice nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasasikkhāpadikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a female training in the ten training rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Himself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ vikappetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having himself done the transfer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ vikappanupagaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robe-cloth, but not smaller than what can be transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikappanā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Transfer: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve vikappanā— sammukhāvikappanā ca parammukhāvikappanā ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two kinds of transfers: transfer face-to-face and transfer in the absence of. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammukhāvikappanā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Transfer face-to-face: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ cīvaraṁ tuyhaṁ vikappemi itthannāmassa vā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one should say, “I transfer this robe-cloth to you,” or “I transfer this robe-cloth to so-and-so.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parammukhāvikappanā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Transfer in the absence of: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ cīvaraṁ vikappanatthāya tuyhaṁ dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one should say, “I give this robe-cloth to you for the purpose of transfer.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena vattabbo— “ko te mitto vā sandiṭṭho vā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">The other should ask, “Who is your friend or companion?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Itthannāmo ca itthannāmo cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should reply, “So-and-so and so-and-so.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena vattabbo— “ahaṁ tesaṁ dammi, tesaṁ santakaṁ paribhuñja vā vissajjehi vā yathāpaccayaṁ vā karohī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The other should say, “I give it to them. Please use their property, give it away, or do as you like with it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaccuddhāraṇaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without it first being relinquished: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa vā adinnaṁ, tassa vā avissasanto paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is not given to him or he uses it without taking it on trust, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaccuddhāraṇe appaccuddhāraṇasaññī paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, and he perceives that it has not, and he uses it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaccuddhāraṇe vematiko paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, but he is unsure of it, and he uses it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaccuddhāraṇe appaccuddhāraṇasaññī paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, but he perceives that it has, and he uses it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhiṭṭheti vā vissajjeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he determines it or gives it away, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paccuddhāraṇe appaccuddhāraṇasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been relinquished, but he perceives that it has not, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paccuddhāraṇe vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been relinquished, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paccuddhāraṇe paccuddhāraṇasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been relinquished, and he perceives that it has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so vā deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the other person gives it; or </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa vā vissasanto paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he uses it after taking the other person’s property on trust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikappanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on transferring to another, the ninth, is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
