<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np17_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on silk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">17. Eḷakalomadhovāpanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">17. The training rule on having wool washed </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṁ nigrodhārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the Sakyan country in the Banyan Tree Monastery at Kapilavatthu. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunīhi eḷakalomāni dhovāpentipi rajāpentipi vijaṭāpentipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six had the nuns wash, dye, and comb wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo eḷakalomāni dhovantiyo rajantiyo vijaṭentiyo riñcanti uddesaṁ paripucchaṁ adhisīlaṁ adhicittaṁ adhipaññaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of this, the nuns neglected recitation, questioning, the higher morality, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahāpajāpati gotamī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ aṭṭhāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahāpajāpati Gotamī then went to the Buddha and bowed down to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ ṭhitaṁ kho mahāpajāpatiṁ gotamiṁ bhagavā etadavoca—“kacci, gotami, bhikkhuniyo appamattā ātāpiniyo pahitattā viharantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the Buddha said to her, “Gotamī, I hope the nuns are heedful, energetic, and diligent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kuto, bhante, bhikkhunīnaṁ appamādo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns be heedful, Venerable Sir?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyā chabbaggiyā bhikkhunīhi eḷakalomāni dhovāpentipi rajāpentipi vijaṭāpentipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she told him what was happening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo eḷakalomāni dhovantiyo rajantiyo vijaṭentiyo riñcanti uddesaṁ paripucchaṁ adhisīlaṁ adhicittaṁ adhipaññan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā mahāpajāpatiṁ gotamiṁ dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṁsesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha then instructed, inspired, and gladdened her with a teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahāpajāpati gotamī bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṁsitā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She bowed down, circumambulated him with her right side toward him, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā chabbaggiye bhikkhū paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks from the group of six: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhunīhi eḷakalomāni dhovāpethapi rajāpethapi vijaṭāpethapī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ñātikāyo tumhākaṁ, bhikkhave, aññātikāyo”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are they your relatives?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātikāyo, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññātakā, moghapurisā, aññātikānaṁ na jānanti patirūpaṁ vā appatirūpaṁ vā pāsādikaṁ vā apāsādikaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, people who are unrelated don’t know what’s appropriate and inappropriate, what’s inspiring and uninspiring, in dealing with each other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, aññātikāhi bhikkhunīhi eḷakalomāni dhovāpessathapi rajāpessathapi vijaṭāpessathapi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And still you do this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu aññātikāya bhikkhuniyā eḷakalomāni dhovāpeyya vā rajāpeyya vā vijaṭāpeyya vā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has an unrelated nun wash, dye, or comb wool, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unrelated: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātito vā pitito vā yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā asambaddhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who is not a descendant of one’s male ancestors going back seven generations, either on the mother’s side or on the father’s side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhovāti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells her to wash it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhotāni nissaggiyāni honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been washed, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rajāti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells her to dye it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattāni nissaggiyāni honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been dyed, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijaṭehīti āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells her to comb it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijaṭitāni nissaggiyāni honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it has been combed, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbāni saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The wool should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imāni me, bhante, eḷakalomāni aññātikāya bhikkhuniyā dhovāpitāni nissaggiyāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this wool, which I got washed by an unrelated nun, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imānāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this wool back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni dhovāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her wash wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni dhovāpeti rajāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her wash and dye wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni dhovāpeti vijaṭāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her wash and comb wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni dhovāpeti rajāpeti vijaṭāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her wash, dye, and comb wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and two offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni rajāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her dye wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni rajāpeti vijaṭāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her dye and comb wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni rajāpeti dhovāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her dye and wash wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni rajāpeti vijaṭāpeti dhovāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her dye, comb, and wash wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and two offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni vijaṭāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her comb wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni vijaṭāpeti dhovāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her comb and wash wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni vijaṭāpeti rajāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her comb and dye wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya aññātikasaññī eḷakalomāni vijaṭāpeti dhovāpeti rajāpeti, nissaggiyena āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated and he perceives her as such, and he has her comb, wash, and dye wool, he commits one offense entailing relinquishment and two offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātikāya vematiko …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated, but he is unsure of it … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññātikāya ñātikasaññī …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is unrelated, but he perceives her as related … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa eḷakalomāni dhovāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has her wash wool belonging to someone else, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekato upasampannāya dhovāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has a nun who is fully ordained only on one side do the washing, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya aññātikasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related, but he perceives her as unrelated, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātikāya ñātikasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is related and he perceives her as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātikāya dhovantiyā aññātikā dutiyā hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a related nun does the washing and an unrelated nun helps her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avuttā dhovati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a nun does the washing without being asked; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aparibhuttaṁ katabhaṇḍaṁ dhovāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has a nun wash an unused and finished article; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhamānāya</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a trainee nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇeriyā</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a novice nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eḷakalomadhovāpanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on having wool washed, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
