<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc18_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">18. Vehāsakuṭisikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">18. The training rule on upper stories </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena dve bhikkhū saṅghike vihāre uparivehāsakuṭiyā eko heṭṭhā viharati, eko upari.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time two monks were staying in a dwelling with an upper story belonging to the Sangha, one staying below and one above. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uparimo bhikkhu āhaccapādakaṁ mañcaṁ sahasā abhinisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk above sat down forcefully on a bed with detachable legs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañcapādo nippatitvā heṭṭhimassa bhikkhuno matthake avatthāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A leg fell off and hit the monk below on the head. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu vissaramakāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He cried out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū upadhāvitvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monks came rushing to </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, āvuso, vissaramakāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">and asked him why, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu saṅghike vihāre uparivehāsakuṭiyā āhaccapādakaṁ mañcaṁ sahasā abhinisīdissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a monk sit down forcefully on a bed with detachable legs on an upper story in a dwelling belonging to the Sangha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū taṁ bhikkhuṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking that monk in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, saṅghike vihāre uparivehāsakuṭiyā āhaccapādakaṁ mañcaṁ sahasā abhinisīdasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, saṅghike vihāre uparivehāsakuṭiyā āhaccapādakaṁ mañcaṁ sahasā abhinisīdissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu saṅghike vihāre uparivehāsakuṭiyā āhaccapādakaṁ mañcaṁ vā pīṭhaṁ vā abhinisīdeyya vā abhinipajjeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk sits down or lies down on a bed or a bench with detachable legs on an upper story in a dwelling belonging to the Sangha, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">…The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghiko nāma vihāro</span></p>
<p class="p3">A dwelling belonging to the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghassa dinno hoti pariccatto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">given to the Sangha, given up to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vehāsakuṭi nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An upper story: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhimassa purisassa asīsaghaṭṭā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a man of average height does not hit his head. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhaccapādako nāma mañco</span></p>
<p class="p3">A bed with detachable legs: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅge vijjhitvā ṭhito hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it stands after inserting the limbs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhaccapādakaṁ nāma pīṭhaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">A bench with detachable legs: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅge vijjhitvā ṭhitaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it stands after inserting the limbs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinisīdeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sits down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ abhinisīdati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sits down on it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinipajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lies down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ abhinipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he lies down on it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike saṅghikasaññī uparivehāsakuṭiyā āhaccapādakaṁ mañcaṁ vā pīṭhaṁ vā abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, and he perceives it as such, and he sits down or lies down on a bed or a bench with detachable legs on an upper story, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike vematiko …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he is unsure of it … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghike puggalikasaññī uparivehāsakuṭiyā āhaccapādakaṁ mañcaṁ vā pīṭhaṁ vā abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he perceives it as belonging to an individual, and he sits down or lies down on a bed or a bench with detachable legs on an upper story, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike saṅghikasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he perceives it as belonging to the Sangha, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike puggalikasaññī aññassa puggalike, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, and he perceives it as such, but that individual is not himself, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attano puggalike, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to himself, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avehāsakuṭiyā</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is no upper story; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīsaghaṭṭāya</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the upper story is so low that one hits the head; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">heṭṭhā aparibhogaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the lower story is not in use; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padarasañcitaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the upper story has floorboards; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭāṇi dinnā hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the legs are fastened by bolts; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ ṭhito gaṇhati vā laggeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stands on it to get hold of something or to put something up; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vehāsakuṭisikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on upper stories, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
