<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc81_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">81. Dubbalasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">81. The training rule on what is worn out </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā dabbo mallaputto saṅghassa senāsanañca paññapeti bhattāni ca uddisati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Dabba the Mallian, who was the assigner of dwellings and the designator of meals, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So cāyasmā dubbalacīvaro hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">had a robe that was worn out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena saṅghassa ekaṁ cīvaraṁ uppannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the Sangha had obtained a robe, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho saṅgho taṁ cīvaraṁ āyasmato dabbassa mallaputtassa adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">which it gave to Dabba. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six complained and criticized it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yathāsanthutaṁ bhikkhū saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇāmentī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The monks are diverting the Sangha’s material gains according to friendship.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū samaggena saṅghena cīvaraṁ datvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six give out a robe as part of a unanimous Sangha and then criticize it afterwards?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, samaggena saṅghena cīvaraṁ datvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, samaggena saṅghena cīvaraṁ datvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ, vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu samaggena saṅghena cīvaraṁ datvā pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjeyya ‘yathāsanthutaṁ bhikkhū saṅghikaṁ lābhaṁ pariṇāmentī’ti, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk gives out a robe as part of a unanimous Sangha and then criticizes it afterwards, saying, “The monks are diverting the Sangha’s material gains according to friendship,” he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaggo nāma saṅgho</span></p>
<p class="p3">A unanimous Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samānasaṁvāsako samānasīmāyaṁ ṭhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">belonging to the same Buddhist sect and staying within the same monastic boundary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ vikappanupagaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robe-cloth, but not smaller than what can be transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Datvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ datvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gives out himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāsanthutaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">According to friendship: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathāmittatā yathāsandiṭṭhatā yathāsambhattatā yathāsamānupajjhāyakatā yathāsamānācariyakatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">according to friendship, according to companionship, according to who one is devoted to, according to being a co-student, according to being a co-pupil. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghikaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha’s: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghassa dinnaṁ hoti pariccattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">given to the Sangha, given up to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Material gains: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārā, antamaso cuṇṇapiṇḍopi, dantakaṭṭhampi, dasikasuttampi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">robes, almsfood, a dwelling, and medicines; even a bit of bath powder, a tooth cleaner, or a piece of string. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchā khīyanadhammaṁ āpajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Criticizes it afterwards: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannassa saṅghena sammatassa senāsanapaññāpakassa vā bhattuddesakassa vā yāgubhājakassa vā phalabhājakassa vā khajjabhājakassa vā appamattakavissajjakassa vā cīvaraṁ dinne khiyyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when robe-cloth has been given to someone who is fully ordained and who is the assigner of dwellings or the designator of meals or the distributor of rice porridge or the distributor of fruit or the distributor of fresh foods or the distributor of minor requisites, and he has been appointed by the Sangha as such, then if a monk criticizes the giving, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī cīvaraṁ dinne khiyyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, and he criticizes the giving of robe-cloth, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko cīvaraṁ dinne khiyyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, and he criticizes the giving of robe-cloth, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī cīvaraṁ dinne khiyyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as illegitimate, and he criticizes it the giving of robe-cloth, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ parikkhāraṁ dinne khiyyati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he criticizes the giving of another requisite, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannassa saṅghena asammatassa senāsanapaññāpakassa vā bhattuddesakassa vā yāgubhājakassa vā phalabhājakassa vā khajjabhājakassa vā appamattakavissajjakassa vā cīvaraṁ vā aññaṁ vā parikkhāraṁ dinne khiyyati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When robe-cloth or another requisite has been given to someone who is fully ordained and who is the assigner of dwellings or the designator of meals or the distributor of rice porridge or the distributor of fruit or the distributor of fresh foods or the distributor of minor requisites, but he has not been appointed by the Sangha as such, then if a monk criticizes the giving, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannassa saṅghena sammatassa vā asammatassa vā senāsanapaññāpakassa vā bhattuddesakassa vā yāgubhājakassa vā phalabhājakassa vā khajjabhājakassa vā appamattakavissajjakassa vā cīvaraṁ vā aññaṁ vā parikkhāraṁ dinne khiyyati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When robe-cloth or another requisite has been given to someone who is not fully ordained and who is the assigner of dwellings or the designator of meals or the distributor of rice porridge or the distributor of fruit or the distributor of fresh foods or the distributor of minor requisites, whether he has been appointed by the Sangha as such or not, then if a monk criticizes the giving, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as legitimate, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pakatiyā chandā dosā mohā bhayā karontaṁ “kvattho tassa dinnena laddhāpi vinipātessati na sammā upanessatī”ti khiyyati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he criticizes one who regularly acts out of favoritism, ill will, confusion, or fear, saying, “What’s the point of giving it to him—he’ll ruin it or use it inappropriately;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbalasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ ekādasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on what is worn out, the eleventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
