<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-ss12_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbacasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">12. The training rule on being difficult to correct </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā kosambiyaṁ viharati ghositārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā channo anācāraṁ ācarati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Channa was misbehaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks would tell him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māvuso channa, evarūpaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t do that; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ kappatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s not allowable,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he would reply, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ nu kho nāma tumhe, āvuso, maṁ vattabbaṁ maññatha?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who are you to correct me? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṁ kho nāma tumhe vadeyyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I should correct you! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākaṁ buddho amhākaṁ dhammo</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha is mine; the Teaching is mine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amhākaṁ ayyaputtena dhammo abhisamito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Master realized the Truth because of me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi nāma mahāvāto vāyanto tiṇakaṭṭhapaṇṇasaṭaṁ ekato ussāreyya, seyyathā vā pana nadī pabbateyyā saṅkhasevālapaṇakaṁ ekato ussāreyya;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as grass, sticks, and fallen leaves are whirled up by a strong wind all at once, just as various water plants are whirled up by a mountain stream all at once, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evameva tumhe nānānāmā nānāgottā nānājaccā nānākulā pabbajitā ekato ussāritā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">so too have you–after going forth with various names, various families, various castes, various households–been lifted up all at once. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṁ nu kho nāma tumhe, āvuso, maṁ vattabbaṁ maññatha?</span></p>
<p class="p3">So, who are you to correct me? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṁ kho nāma tumhe vadeyyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I should correct you! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākaṁ buddho amhākaṁ dhammo</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha is mine; the Teaching is mine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amhākaṁ ayyaputtena dhammo abhisamito”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Master realized the Truth because of me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā channo bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ karissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Channa make himself incorrigible when he’s legitimately corrected by the monks?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ channaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They rebuked Channa in many ways and then told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Channa: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, channa, bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ karosī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Channa, that you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ karissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhu paneva dubbacajātiko hoti uddesapariyāpannesu sikkhāpadesu bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk is difficult to correct, and he makes himself incorrigible when legitimately corrected by the monks concerning the training rules that are recited, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā maṁ āyasmanto kiñci avacuttha kalyāṇaṁ vā pāpakaṁ vā, ahampāyasmante na kiñci vakkhāmi kalyāṇaṁ vā pāpakaṁ vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, don’t say anything to me, either good or bad, and I won’t say anything to you, either good or bad. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viramathāyasmanto mama vacanāyā’ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please refrain from correcting me,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhikkhu bhikkhūhi evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">then the monks should correct him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘māyasmā attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ akāsi, vacanīyamevāyasmā attānaṁ karotu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Be easy to correct, Venerable, not incorrigible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmāpi bhikkhū vadetu sahadhammena, bhikkhūpi āyasmantaṁ vakkhanti sahadhammena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And please give legitimate correction to the monks, and the monks will do the same to you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ saṁvaddhā hi tassa bhagavato parisā yadidaṁ aññamaññavacanena aññamaññavuṭṭhāpanenā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For it’s in this way that the Buddha’s community has grown, that is, through mutual correction and mutual clearing of offenses.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca so bhikkhu bhikkhūhi vuccamāno tatheva paggaṇheyya, so bhikkhu bhikkhūhi yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsitabbo tassa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that monk continues as before, the monks should press him up to three times to make him stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyañce samanubhāsiyamāno taṁ paṭinissajjeyya, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjeyya, saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not stop, he commits an offense entailing suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū paneva dubbacajātiko hotīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk is difficult to correct: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbaco hoti dovacassakaraṇehi dhammehi samannāgato akkhamo appadakkhiṇaggāhī anusāsaniṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is hard to correct, endowed with qualities that make him hard to correct, resistant, not receiving instructions respectfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddesapariyāpannesu sikkhāpadesūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Concerning the training rules that are recited: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pātimokkhapariyāpannesu sikkhāpadesu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">concerning the training rules of the Monastic Code. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññehi bhikkhūhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">other monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Legitimately: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ bhagavatā paññattaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ, etaṁ sahadhammikaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the training rules laid down by the Buddha—this is called “legitimately”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena vuccamāno attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When corrected in regard to this, he makes himself incorrigible, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mā maṁ āyasmanto kiñci avacuttha kalyāṇaṁ vā pāpakaṁ vā, ahampāyasmante na kiñci vakkhāmi kalyāṇaṁ vā pāpakaṁ vā. Viramathāyasmanto mama vacanāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, don’t say anything to me, either good or bad, and I won’t say anything to you, either good or bad. Please refrain from correcting me.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo so dubbacajātiko bhikkhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk who is difficult to correct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññehi bhikkhūhi. Ye passanti ye suṇanti tehi vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other monks, those who see it or hear about it. They should correct him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyasmā attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Be easy to correct, Venerable, not incorrigible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vacanīyameva āyasmā attānaṁ karotu.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmāpi bhikkhū vadetu sahadhammena, bhikkhūpi āyasmantaṁ vakkhanti sahadhammena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And please give legitimate correction to the monks, and the monks will do the same to you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ saṁvaddhā hi tassa bhagavato parisā yadidaṁ aññamaññavacanena aññamaññavuṭṭhāpanenā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For it’s in this way that the Buddha’s community has grown, that is, through mutual correction and mutual clearing of offenses.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct him a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not stop, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvā na vadanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If those who hear about it do not say anything, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu saṅghamajjhampi ākaḍḍhitvā vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk, even if he has to be pulled into the Sangha, should be corrected like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyasmā attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ akāsi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Be easy to correct, Venerable, not incorrigible. And please give legitimate correction to the monks, and the monks will do the same to you. For it’s in this way that the Buddha’s community has grown, that is, through mutual correction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññamaññavuṭṭhāpanenā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and mutual clearing of offenses.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They should correct him a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not stop, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu samanubhāsitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should press him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, samanubhāsitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, he should be pressed like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable monk should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk so-and-so makes himself incorrigible when legitimately corrected by the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he keeps on doing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ samanubhāseyya tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should press him to make him stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk so-and-so makes himself incorrigible when legitimately corrected by the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he keeps on doing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ samanubhāsati tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha presses him to make him stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno samanubhāsanā tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of pressing him to make him stop should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the second time I speak on this matter: … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the third time I speak on this matter: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu bhikkhūhi sahadhammikaṁ vuccamāno attānaṁ avacanīyaṁ karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk so-and-so makes himself incorrigible when legitimately corrected by the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he keeps on doing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ samanubhāsati tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha presses him to make him stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno samanubhāsanā tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of pressing him to make him stop should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanubhaṭṭho saṅghena itthannāmo bhikkhu tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has pressed monk so-and-so to stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, he commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesaṁ ajjhāpajjantassa ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ, dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā paṭippassambhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For one who commits the offense entailing suspension, the offense of wrong conduct and the serious offenses are annulled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He commits an offense entailing suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati “saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called “an offense entailing suspension”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī na paṭinissajjati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, but he does not stop, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko na paṭinissajjati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, and he does not stop, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī na paṭinissajjati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as illegitimate, and he does not stop, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as legitimate, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asamanubhāsantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has not been pressed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭinissajjantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stops; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbacasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dvādasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The  training rule on being difficult to correct, the twelfth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
