<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc9_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">9. Duṭṭhullārocanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">9. The training rule on telling about what is grave </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto chabbaggiyehi bhikkhūhi saddhiṁ bhaṇḍanakato hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Upananda the Sakyan was quarreling with the monks from the group of six. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sañcetanikaṁ sukkavissaṭṭhiṁ āpattiṁ āpajjitvā saṅghaṁ tassā āpattiyā parivāsaṁ yāci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then committed an offense of intentional emission of semen. He asked the Sangha for probation for that offense, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa saṅgho tassā āpattiyā parivāsaṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">which he received. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṁ aññatarassa pūgassa saṅghabhattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then an association in Sāvatthī was offering a meal to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So parivasanto bhattagge āsanapariyante nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because Upananda was on probation, he sat on the last seat in the dining hall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū te upāsake etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six then told those lay followers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“eso, āvuso, āyasmā upanando sakyaputto tumhākaṁ sambhāvito kulūpako; yeneva hatthena saddhādeyyaṁ bhuñjati teneva hatthena upakkamitvā asuciṁ mocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This Venerable Upananda, the esteemed associate of your families, eats the food given in faith with the same hand he uses to masturbate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sañcetanikaṁ sukkavissaṭṭhiṁ āpattiṁ āpajjitvā saṅghaṁ tassā āpattiyā parivāsaṁ yāci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After committing an offense of intentional emission of semen, he asked the Sangha for probation for that offense, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa saṅgho tassā āpattiyā parivāsaṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">which he received. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So parivasanto āsanapariyante nisinno”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And because he’s on probation, he now sits on the last seat.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhussa duṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ anupasampannassa ārocessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six tell a person who’s not fully ordained about a monk’s grave offense?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhussa duṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ anupasampannassa ārocethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhussa duṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ anupasampannassa ārocessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhussa duṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ anupasampannassa āroceyya, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk tells a person who is not fully ordained about a monk’s grave offense, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhussāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk’s: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa bhikkhussa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another monk’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullā nāma āpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A grave offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri ca pārājikāni, terasa ca saṅghādisesā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the four offenses entailing expulsion and the thirteen offenses entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who is not fully ordained: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuñca bhikkhuniñca ṭhapetvā avaseso anupasampanno nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone except a fully ordained monk or a fully ordained nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āroceyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Tells: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āroceyya itthiyā vā purisassa vā gahaṭṭhassa vā pabbajitassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">tells a woman or a man, a lay person or a monastic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra bhikkhusammutiyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except if the monks have agreed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā bhikkhusammutiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless the monks have agreed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi bhikkhusammuti āpattipariyantā, na kulapariyantā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is agreement of the monks with a limit on offenses, but not on families. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi bhikkhusammuti kulapariyantā, na āpattipariyantā, atthi bhikkhusammuti āpattipariyantā ca kulapariyantā ca, atthi bhikkhusammuti neva āpattipariyantā na kulapariyantā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is agreement of the monks with a limit on families, but not on offenses. There is agreement of the monks with a limit both on offenses and on families. There is agreement of the monks with neither a limit on offenses nor on families. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattipariyantā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">With a limit on offenses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpattiyo pariggahitāyo honti— “ettakāhi āpattīhi ārocetabbo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">offenses are specified: “These particular offenses can be told about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulapariyantā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">With limit on families: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kulāni pariggahitāni honti— “ettakesu kulesu ārocetabbo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">families are specified: “These particular families can be told.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattipariyantā ca kulapariyantā ca nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">With a limit both on offenses and on families: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpattiyo ca pariggahitāyo honti, kulāni ca pariggahitāni honti— “ettakāhi āpattīhi ettakesu kulesu ārocetabbo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">both offenses and families are specified: “These particular offenses can be told about, and these particular families can be told.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva āpattipariyantā na kulapariyantā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">With neither a limit on offenses nor on families: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpattiyo ca apariggahitāyo honti, kulāni ca apariggahitāni honti— “ettakāhi āpattīhi ettakesu kulesu ārocetabbo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">neither offenses nor families are specified in this way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattipariyante yā āpattiyo pariggahitāyo honti, tā āpattiyo ṭhapetvā aññāhi āpattīhi āroceti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is a limit on offenses, if he tells about other offenses than those that are specified, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulapariyante yāni kulāni pariggahitāni honti, tāni kulāni ṭhapetvā aññesu kulesu āroceti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is a limit on families, if he tells other families than those that are specified, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattipariyante ca kulapariyante ca yā āpattiyo pariggahitāyo honti, tā āpattiyo ṭhapetvā yāni kulāni pariggahitāni honti, tāni kulāni ṭhapetvā aññāhi āpattīhi aññesu kulesu āroceti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is a limit both on offenses and on families, if he tells about other offenses than those that are specified and he tells other families than those that are specified, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva āpattipariyante na kulapariyante, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When there is neither a limit on offenses nor on families, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullāya āpattiyā duṭṭhullāpattisaññī anupasampannassa āroceti, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the offense is grave, and he perceives it as such, and he tells a person who is not fully ordained, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullāya āpattiyā vematiko anupasampannassa āroceti, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the offense is grave, but he is unsure of it, and he tells a person who is not fully ordained, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullāya āpattiyā aduṭṭhullāpattisaññī anupasampannassa āroceti, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the offense is grave, but he perceives it as minor, and he tells a person who is not fully ordained, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aduṭṭhullaṁ āpattiṁ āroceti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells about a minor offense, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannassa duṭṭhullaṁ vā aduṭṭhullaṁ vā ajjhācāraṁ āroceti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he tells about the misconduct of a person who is not fully ordained, whether grave or minor, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aduṭṭhullāya āpattiyā duṭṭhullāpattisaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the offense is minor, but he perceives it as grave, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aduṭṭhullāya āpattiyā vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the offense is minor, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aduṭṭhullāya āpattiyā aduṭṭhullāpattisaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the offense is minor, and he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vatthuṁ āroceti no āpattiṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he tells about the action that was the basis for the offense, but not the class of offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpattiṁ āroceti no vatthuṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he tells about the class of offense, but not the action that was the basis for the offense; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhusammutiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monks have agreed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭhullārocanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on telling about what is grave, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
