<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc50_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on naked ascetics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">50. Uyyodhikasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">50. The training rule on battles </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū dirattatirattaṁ senāya vasamānā uyyodhikampi balaggampi senābyūhampi anīkadassanampi gacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six were staying with the army for two or three nights. They went to see battles, troop reviews, the massing of the army, and troop inspections. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataropi chabbaggiyo bhikkhu uyyodhikaṁ gantvā kaṇḍena paṭividdho hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One of the monks who went to a battle was struck by an arrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā taṁ bhikkhuṁ uppaṇḍesuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People teased him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, bhante, suyuddhaṁ ahosi, kati te lakkhāni laddhānī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We hope you had a good battle, Venerable. How many targets did you hit?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu tehi manussehi uppaṇḍiyamāno maṅku ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And because they teased him, he felt humiliated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā uyyodhikaṁ dassanāya āgacchissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics go to see a battle? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākampi alābhā, amhākampi dulladdhaṁ, ye mayaṁ ājīvassa hetu puttadārassa kāraṇā uyyodhikaṁ āgacchāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s our misfortune that we must go to battles for the sake of our livelihood and because of our wives and children.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū uyyodhikaṁ dassanāya gacchissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six go to see a battle?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, uyyodhikaṁ dassanāya gacchathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, uyyodhikaṁ dassanāya gacchissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dirattatirattañce bhikkhu senāya vasamāno uyyodhikaṁ vā balaggaṁ vā senābyūhaṁ vā anīkadassanaṁ vā gaccheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who is staying with an army for two or three nights goes to a battle, a troop review, a massing of the army, or a troop inspection, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dirattatirattañce bhikkhu senāya vasamānoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk who is staying with an army for two or three nights: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvetisso rattiyo vasamāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is staying for two or for three nights. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyodhikaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A battle: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha sampahāro dissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever fighting is seen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Balaggaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A troop review: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettakā hatthī, ettakā assā, ettakā rathā, ettakā pattī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">so many elephants, so many horses, so many chariots, so much infantry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Senābyūhaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A massing of the army: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ito hatthī hontu, ito assā hontu, ito rathā hontu, ito pattikā hontu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the elephants should set out from here; the horses should set out from here; the chariots should set out from here; the infantry should set out from here. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anīkaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A troop: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthānīkaṁ, assānīkaṁ, rathānīkaṁ, pattānīkaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An elephant troop, a horse troop, a chariot troop, an infantry troop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayo hatthī pacchimaṁ hatthānīkaṁ, tayo assā pacchimaṁ assānīkaṁ, tayo rathā pacchimaṁ rathānīkaṁ, cattāro purisā sarahatthā pattī pacchimaṁ pattānīkaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The smallest troop of elephants is three elephants; the smallest troop of horses is three horses; the smallest troop of chariots is three chariots; the smallest troop of infantry is four men with arrows in hand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanāya gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is on his way to see it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhito passati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever he stands to see it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vijahitvā punappunaṁ passati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Every time he moves outside the range of sight and then sees it again, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamekaṁ dassanāya gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is on his way to see one division of a fourfold army, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhito passati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever he stands to see it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vijahitvā punappunaṁ passati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Every time he moves outside the range of sight and then sees it again, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāme ṭhito passati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sees it while standing in a monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhussa ṭhitokāsaṁ vā nisinnokāsaṁ vā nipannokāsaṁ vā āgantvā sampahāro dissati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the army comes to where the monk is standing, sitting, or lying down, and he then sees fighting; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭipathaṁ gacchanto passati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sees it while walking in the opposite direction; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati karaṇīye gantvā passati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes because there is something to be done, and he then sees it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyodhikasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on battles, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavaggo pañcamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth sub-chapter on naked ascetics is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pūvaṁ kathopanandassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pastry, talking, three on Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tayaṁpaṭṭhākameva ca;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And indeed supporting; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahānāmo pasenadi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Mahānāma, Pasenadi, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">senāviddho ime dasāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Army, and struck: those are the ten.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
