<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc68_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">68. Ariṭṭhasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">68. The training rule on Ariṭṭha </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena ariṭṭhassa nāma bhikkhuno gaddhabādhipubbassa evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monk Ariṭṭha, the ex-vulture-killer, had the following bad and erroneous view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As I understand the Teaching of the Buddha, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho sambahulā bhikkhū—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A number of monks heard </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ariṭṭhassa kira nāma bhikkhuno gaddhabādhipubbassa evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">that Ariṭṭha had that view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā, te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū yena ariṭṭho bhikkhu gaddhabādhipubbo tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā ariṭṭhaṁ bhikkhuṁ gaddhabādhipubbaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They went to him and asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira te, āvuso ariṭṭha, evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Ariṭṭha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā, te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">that you have such a view?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ byā kho ahaṁ, āvuso, bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi— ‘yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, indeed. As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā, āvuso ariṭṭha, evaṁ avaca. Mā bhagavantaṁ abbhācikkhi. Na hi sādhu bhagavato abbhakkhānaṁ. Na hi bhagavā evaṁ vadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Ariṭṭha, don’t misrepresent the Buddha, for it’s not good to misrepresent him. The Buddha would never say such a thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anekapariyāyenāvuso ariṭṭha, antarāyikā dhammā antarāyikā vuttā bhagavatā. Alañca pana te paṭisevato antarāyāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has given many discourses about the obstructive things being obstructive and how they obstruct one who indulges in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appassādā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā bahudukkhā bahupāyāsā, ādīnavo ettha bhiyyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has said that there is little enjoyment in worldly pleasures, but much suffering and much trouble, and that the danger in them is greater. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhikaṅkalūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā bahudukkhā bahupāyāsā, ādīnavo ettha bhiyyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has said that worldly pleasures are similar to a skeleton … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maṁsapesūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a piece of meat … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇukkūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a grass torch … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅgārakāsūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a pit of coals … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">supinakūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a dream … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yācitakūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to borrowed goods … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rukkhaphalūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to fruits on a tree … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asisūnūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a knife and chopping block … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattisūlūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to swords and stakes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappasirūpamā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā bahudukkhā bahupāyāsā, ādīnavo ettha bhiyyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a snake’s head; they are much suffering and much trouble, and the danger in them is greater.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho ariṭṭho bhikkhu gaddhabādhipubbo tehi bhikkhūhi vuccamāno tatheva taṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ thāmasā parāmāsā abhinivissa voharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But even though the monks corrected Ariṭṭha like this, he stubbornly held on to that bad and erroneous view, and continued to insist on it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“evaṁ byā kho ahaṁ, āvuso, bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi— ‘yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā, te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho te bhikkhū nāsakkhiṁsu ariṭṭhaṁ bhikkhuṁ gaddhabādhipubbaṁ etasmā pāpakā diṭṭhigatā vivecetuṁ, atha kho te bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Since they were unable to make him give up that view, they went to the Buddha and told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā ariṭṭhaṁ bhikkhuṁ gaddhabādhipubbaṁ paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned Ariṭṭha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira te, ariṭṭha, evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Ariṭṭha, that you have such a view?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ byā kho ahaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi— ‘yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes indeed, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassa nu kho nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, mayā evaṁ dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāsi?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, who do you think I have taught like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nanu mayā, moghapurisa, anekapariyāyena antarāyikā dhammā antarāyikā vuttā. Alañca pana te paṭisevato antarāyāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Haven’t I given many discourses about the obstructive things being obstructive and how they obstruct one who indulges in them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appassādā kāmā vuttā mayā bahudukkhā bahupāyāsā, ādīnavo ettha bhiyyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I have said that there is little enjoyment in worldly pleasures, but much suffering and much trouble, and that the danger in them is greater. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhikaṅkalūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I have said that worldly pleasures are similar to a skeleton … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maṁsapesūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a piece of meat … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇukkūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a grass torch … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅgārakāsūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a pit of coals … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">supinakūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a dream … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yācitakūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to borrowed goods … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rukkhaphalūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to fruits on a tree … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asisūnūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a knife and chopping block … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattisūlūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to swords and stakes … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappasirūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā bahudukkhā bahupāyāsā, ādīnavo ettha bhiyyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a snake’s head; they are much suffering and much trouble, and the danger in them is greater. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ca pana tvaṁ, moghapurisa, attanā duggahitena amhe ceva abbhācikkhasi, attānañca khaṇasi, bahuñca apuññaṁ pasavasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And yet, foolish man, by misunderstanding you have misrepresented me, hurt yourself, and made much demerit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi te, moghapurisa, bhavissati dīgharattaṁ ahitāya dukkhāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will be for your long-lasting harm and suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā, te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so bhikkhu bhikkhūhi evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">then the monks should correct him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘māyasmā evaṁ avaca, mā bhagavantaṁ abbhācikkhi, na hi sādhu bhagavato abbhakkhānaṁ, na hi bhagavā evaṁ vadeyya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Venerable, don’t misrepresent the Buddha, for it’s not good to misrepresent the Buddha. The Buddha would never say such a thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anekapariyāyenāvuso, antarāyikā dhammā antarāyikā vuttā bhagavatā, alañca pana te paṭisevato antarāyāyā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In many discourses the Buddha has declared the obstructive things to be obstructive and how they obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca so bhikkhu bhikkhūhi vuccamāno tatheva paggaṇheyya, so bhikkhu bhikkhūhi yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsitabbo tassa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that monk continues as before, the monks should press him up to three times to make him give up that view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyañce samanubhāsiyamāno taṁ paṭinissajjeyya, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then gives it up, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vadeyyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo so evaṁvādī bhikkhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk who speaks in that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññehi bhikkhūhi. Ye passanti ye suṇanti tehi vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">other monks, those who see it or hear about it, They should correct him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyasmā evaṁ avaca, mā bhagavantaṁ abbhācikkhi, na hi sādhu bhagavato abbhakkhānaṁ, na hi bhagavā evaṁ vadeyya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Venerable, don’t misrepresent the Buddha, for it’s not good to misrepresent the Buddha. The Buddha would never say such a thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anekapariyāyenāvuso antarāyikā dhammā antarāyikā vuttā bhagavatā. Alañca pana te paṭisevato antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In many discourses the Buddha has declared the obstructive things to be obstructive and how they obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct him a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gives up that view, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvā na vadanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If those who heard about it do not say anything, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu saṅghamajjhampi ākaḍḍhitvā vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk, even if he has to be pulled into the Sangha, should be corrected like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyasmā evaṁ avaca, mā bhagavantaṁ abbhācikkhi, na hi sādhu bhagavato abbhakkhānaṁ, na hi bhagavā evaṁ vadeyya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Venerable, don’t misrepresent the Buddha, for it’s not good to misrepresent the Buddha. The Buddha would never say such a thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anekapariyāyenāvuso antarāyikā dhammā antarāyikā vuttā bhagavatā. Alañca pana te paṭisevato antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In many discourses the Buddha has declared the obstructive things to be obstructive and how they obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct him a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gives up that view, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu samanubhāsitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should then be pressed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, samanubhāsitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, he should be pressed like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable monk should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthannāmassa bhikkhuno evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk so-and-so has the following a bad and erroneous view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā, te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṁ diṭṭhiṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is not giving up that view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ samanubhāseyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should press him </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassā diṭṭhiyā paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to make him give it up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthannāmassa bhikkhuno evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk so-and-so has the following bad and erroneous view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā, te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṁ diṭṭhiṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is not giving up that view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ samanubhāsati tassā diṭṭhiyā paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha presses him to make him give it up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno samanubhāsanā, tassā diṭṭhiyā paṭinissaggāya, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of pressing him to make him give it up should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time I speak on this matter: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthannāmassa bhikkhuno evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk so-and-so has the following bad and erroneous view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So taṁ diṭṭhiṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is not giving up that view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ samanubhāsati tassā diṭṭhiyā paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha presses him to make him give it up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno samanubhāsanā, tassā diṭṭhiyā paṭinissaggāya, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of pressing him to make him give it up should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanubhaṭṭho saṅghena itthannāmo bhikkhu, tassā diṭṭhiyā paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has pressed this monk to give up that view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi dukkaṭā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī na paṭinissajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, and he does not give up his view, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko na paṭinissajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, and he does not give up his view, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī na paṭinissajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as illegitimate, and he does not give up his view, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he perceives it as legitimate, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asamanubhāsantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has not been pressed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭinissajjantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives it up; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"/></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ariṭṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on Ariṭṭha, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
