<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc14_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">14. Senāsanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">14. The training rule on furniture </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery during winter, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū hemantike kāle ajjhokāse senāsanaṁ paññapetvā kāyaṁ otāpentā kāle ārocite taṁ pakkamantā neva uddhariṁsu na uddharāpesuṁ, anāpucchā pakkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks put furniture outside in order to warm themselves in the sun. But when the time for departure was announced, they departed without putting it away, having it put away, or taking leave. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Senāsanaṁ ovaṭṭhaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The furniture was rained on. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṁ hi nāma bhikkhū ajjhokāse senāsanaṁ paññapetvā taṁ pakkamantā neva uddharissanti na uddharāpessanti, anāpucchā pakkamissanti, senāsanaṁ ovaṭṭhan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those monks put furniture outside and then depart without putting it away, having it put away, or taking leave? The furniture was rained on.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū te anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū ajjhokāse …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?… </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu saṅghikaṁ mañcaṁ vā pīṭhaṁ vā bhisiṁ vā kocchaṁ vā ajjhokāse santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya, anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk takes a bed, a bench, a mattress, or a stool belonging to the Sangha and puts it outside or has it put outside, and he then departs without putting it away, having it put away, or taking leave, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū ajjhokāse vasitvā kālasseva senāsanaṁ abhiharanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards, monks who had stayed outside brought the furniture back even though it was not the rainy season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho bhagavā te bhikkhū kālasseva senāsanaṁ abhiharante.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha saw this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving a teaching, he addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, aṭṭha māse avassikasaṅkete maṇḍape vā rukkhamūle vā yattha kākā vā kulalā vā na ūhadanti tattha senāsanaṁ nikkhipitun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, during the eight months outside of the rainy season, I allow you to store furniture under a roof-cover or at the foot of a tree or wherever crows or ravens donʼt leave droppings.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">…The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghikaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Belonging to the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghassa dinnaṁ hoti pariccattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">given to the Sangha, given up to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañco nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A bed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro mañcā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of beds: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">masārako, bundikābaddho, kuḷīrapādako, āhaccapādako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one with legs and frame, called _masāraka_; one with legs and frame, called _bundikābaddha_; one with crooked legs; one with detachable legs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pīṭhaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A bench: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri pīṭhāni— masārakaṁ, bundikābaddhaṁ, kuḷīrapādakaṁ, āhaccapādakaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of benches: one with legs and frame, called _masāraka_; one with legs and frame, called _bundikābaddha_; one with crooked legs; one with detachable legs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhisi nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A mattress: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhisiyo— uṇṇabhisi, coḷabhisi, vākabhisi, tiṇabhisi, paṇṇabhisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of mattresses: a mattress stuffed with wool, a mattress stuffed with cloth, a mattress stuffed with bark, a mattress stuffed with grass, a mattress stuffed with leaves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kocchaṁ nāma—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A stool: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vākamayaṁ vā usīramayaṁ vā muñjamayaṁ vā pabbajamayaṁ vā anto saṁveṭhetvā baddhaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one made of bark, one made of khus grass, one made of reed. It is upholstered and then bound together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santharitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Puts outside: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ santharitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">puts outside oneself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santharāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has put outside:</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ santharāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gets another to put outside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ santharāpeti, tassa palibodho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gets one who is not fully ordained to put it outside, it is the responsibility of the monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannaṁ santharāpeti, santhārakassa palibodho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gets one who is fully ordained to put it outside, it is the responsibility of the one who puts it outside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Departs without putting it away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sayaṁ uddhareyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he does not put it away himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na uddharāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Having it put away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññaṁ uddharāpeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he does not get another to put it away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Or taking leave: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuṁ vā sāmaṇeraṁ vā ārāmikaṁ vā anāpucchā majjhimassa purisassa leḍḍupātaṁ atikkamantassa āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not take leave of a monk, a novice monk, or a monastery worker, then when he goes beyond the distance of a stone-throw of an average man, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike saṅghikasaññī ajjhokāse santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, and he perceives it as such, and he puts it outside or has it put outside, and he then departs without putting it away or having it put away or taking leave, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghike vematiko …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he is unsure of it … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghike puggalikasaññī ajjhokāse santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya, anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to the Sangha, but he perceives it as belonging to an individual, and he puts it outside or has it put outside, and he then departs without putting it away or having it put away or taking leave, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cimilikaṁ vā uttarattharaṇaṁ vā bhūmattharaṇaṁ vā taṭṭikaṁ vā cammakhaṇḍaṁ vā pādapuñchaniṁ vā phalakapīṭhaṁ vā ajjhokāse santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā taṁ pakkamanto neva uddhareyya na uddharāpeyya, anāpucchaṁ vā gaccheyya, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a mat underlay, a bedspread, a floor cover, a straw mat, a hide, a foot-wiping cloth, or a wooden bench, and he puts it outside or has it put outside, and he then departs without putting it away or having it put away or taking leave, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike saṅghikasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he perceives it as belonging to the Sangha, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalike puggalikasaññī aññassa puggalike, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to an individual, and he perceives it as such, but that individual is not himself, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attano puggalike anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it belongs to himself, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddharitvā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he departs after putting it away; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddharāpetvā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he departs after having it put away; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpucchaṁ gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he departs after taking leave; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">otāpento gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he departs while he is sunning it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kenaci palibuddhaṁ hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the furniture is obstructed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Senāsanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on furniture, the fourth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
