<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk37_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkaccavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on respectfully </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">37. Sūpodanaviññattisikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">37. The training rule on asking for rice and bean curry </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sūpampi odanampi attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six ate rice and bean curry that they had requested themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā sūpampi odanampi attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics eat rice and bean curry that they have requested themselves? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassa sampannaṁ na manāpaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who doesn’t like nice food? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassa sāduṁ na ruccatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who doesn’t prefer tasty food?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sūpampi odanampi attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six do this?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, sūpampi odanampi attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, sūpampi odanampi attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na sūpaṁ vā odanaṁ vā attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjissāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘“I will not ask for bean curry or rice for myself and then eat it,” this is how you should train.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū gilānā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a number of monks were sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānapucchakā bhikkhū gilāne bhikkhū etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks who were looking after them asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccāvuso, khamanīyaṁ, kacci yāpanīyan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you’re bearing up? I hope you’re getting better?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbe mayaṁ, āvuso, sūpampi odanampi attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjāma, tena no phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Previously we ate rice and bean curry that we had requested ourselves, and then we were comfortable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idāni pana—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But now </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhagavatā paṭikkhittan’ti kukkuccāyantā na viññāpema, tena no na phāsu hotī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that the Buddha has prohibited this, we don’t ask because we’re afraid of wrongdoing. And because of that we’re not comfortable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānena bhikkhunā sūpampi odanampi attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a sick monk to eat rice and bean curry that he has requested for himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na sūpaṁ vā odanaṁ vā agilāno attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjissāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘“When not sick, I will not ask for bean curry or rice for myself and then eat it,” this is how you should train.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sūpaṁ vā odanaṁ vā agilānena attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When one is not sick, one should not ask for bean curry or rice for oneself and then eat it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca sūpaṁ vā odanaṁ vā agilāno attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk who is not sick, out of disrespect, eats bean curry or rice that he has requested for himself, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of his own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
