<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np1_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">1. Kathinasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">1. The training rule on the robe-making season </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho panāyasmanto tiṁsa nissaggiyā pācittiyā dhammā uddesaṁ āgacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerables, these thirty rules on relinquishment and confession come up for recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā vesāliyaṁ viharati gotamake cetiye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Vesālī at the Gotamaka Shrine, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ ticīvaraṁ anuññātaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he allowed the three robes for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū—“bhagavatā ticīvaraṁ anuññātan”ti aññeneva ticīvarena gāmaṁ pavisanti, aññena ticīvarena ārāme acchanti, aññena ticīvarena nahānaṁ otaranti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When they heard about this, the monks from the group of six entered the village in one set of three robes, stayed in the monastery in another set, and went to bathe in yet another set. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū atirekacīvaraṁ dhāressantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six keep extra robes?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, atirekacīvaraṁ dhārethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, atirekacīvaraṁ dhāressatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu atirekacīvaraṁ dhāreyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk keeps an extra robe, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato ānandassa atirekacīvaraṁ uppannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards Venerable Ānanda was given an extra robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ca ānando taṁ cīvaraṁ āyasmato sāriputtassa dātukāmo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He wanted to give it to Venerable Sāriputta </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ca sāriputto sākete viharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who was staying at Sāketa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato ānandassa etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that the Buddha had laid down a rule against having extra robes, Ānanda thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na atirekacīvaraṁ dhāretabban’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idañca me atirekacīvaraṁ uppannaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañcimaṁ cīvaraṁ āyasmato sāriputtassa dātukāmo.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ca sāriputto sākete viharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ nu kho mayā paṭipajjitabban”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What should I do in this situation?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He told the Buddha, who said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kīvaciraṁ panānanda, sāriputto āgacchissatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How long is it, Ānanda, before Sāriputta returns?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navamaṁ vā, bhagavā, divasaṁ dasamaṁ vā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nine or ten days.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, dasāhaparamaṁ atirekacīvaraṁ dhāretuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, you should keep an extra robe for ten days at the most. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Niṭṭhitacīvarasmiṁ bhikkhunā ubbhatasmiṁ kathine dasāhaparamaṁ atirekacīvaraṁ dhāretabbaṁ. Taṁ atikkāmayato nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When his robe is finished and the robe-making season has ended, a monk should keep an extra robe for ten days at the most. If he keeps it beyond that, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niṭṭhitacīvarasminti</span></p>
<p class="p3">When his robe is finished: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuno cīvaraṁ kataṁ vā hoti naṭṭhaṁ vā vinaṭṭhaṁ vā daḍḍhaṁ vā cīvarāsā vā upacchinnā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk has made a robe; or the robe-cloth has been lost, ruined, or burnt; or he has abandoned his expectation of receiving further robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhatasmiṁ kathineti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-making season has ended: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhannaṁ mātikānaṁ aññatarāya mātikāya ubbhataṁ hoti, saṅghena vā antarā ubbhataṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it has ended according to one of the eight summaries or the Sangha has ended it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhaparamanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">For ten days at the most: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasāhaparamatā dhāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it should be kept ten days at a maximum. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekacīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An extra robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anadhiṭṭhitaṁ avikappitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a robe that is not determined, nor transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ, vikappanupagaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robe-cloth, but not smaller than what can be transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ atikkāmayato nissaggiyaṁ hotīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he keeps it beyond that, it becomes subject to relinquishment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekādase aruṇuggamane nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it becomes subject to relinquishment at dawn on the eleventh day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-cloth should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha, that monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior monks. He should then squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ dasāhātikkantaṁ nissaggiyaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe-cloth, which I have kept over ten days, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, he should confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena āpatti paṭiggahetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by a competent and capable monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṭṭhacīvaraṁ dātabbaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The relinquished robe-cloth is then to be given back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṁ cīvaraṁ itthannāmassa bhikkhuno nissaggiyaṁ saṅghassa nissaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This robe-cloth, which was to be relinquished by monk so-and-so, has been relinquished to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho imaṁ cīvaraṁ itthannāmassa bhikkhuno dadeyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should give this robe-cloth back to monk so-and-so.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā sambahule bhikkhū upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassu vacanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching several monks, that monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior monks. He should then squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ dasāhātikkantaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe-cloth, which I have kept over ten days, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ āyasmantānaṁ nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the venerables.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, he should confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena āpatti paṭiggahetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by a competent and capable monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṭṭhacīvaraṁ dātabbaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The relinquished robe-cloth is then to be given back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṇantu me āyasmantā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask you to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṁ cīvaraṁ itthannāmassa bhikkhuno nissaggiyaṁ āyasmantānaṁ nissaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This robe-cloth, which was to be relinquished by monk so-and-so, has been relinquished to you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadāyasmantānaṁ pattakallaṁ, āyasmantā imaṁ cīvaraṁ itthannāmassa bhikkhuno dadeyyun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to you, you should give this robe-cloth back to monk so-and-so.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā ekaṁ bhikkhuṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching a single monk, that monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder, squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, āvuso, cīvaraṁ dasāhātikkantaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This robe-cloth, which I have kept over ten days, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ āyasmato nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to you.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, he should confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā āpatti paṭiggahetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by that monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṭṭhacīvaraṁ dātabbaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The relinquished robe-cloth is then to be given back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ cīvaraṁ āyasmato dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe-cloth back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhātikkante atikkantasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than ten days and he perceives it as more, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhātikkante vematiko, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than ten days, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhātikkante anatikkantasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than ten days, but he perceives it as less, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhiṭṭhite adhiṭṭhitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been determined, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avikappite vikappitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been transferred, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avissajjite vissajjitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been given away, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaṭṭhe naṭṭhasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been lost, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avinaṭṭhe vinaṭṭhasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been ruined, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaḍḍhe daḍḍhasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been burnt, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avilutte viluttasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been stolen, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyaṁ cīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he uses robe-cloth that should be relinquished without first relinquishing it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhānatikkante atikkantasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than ten days, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhānatikkante vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than ten days, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasāhānatikkante anatikkantasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than ten days and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antodasāhaṁ adhiṭṭheti, vikappeti, vissajjeti, nassati, vinassati, ḍayhati, acchinditvā gaṇhanti, vissāsaṁ gaṇhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if within ten days it has been determined, transferred to another, given away, lost, ruined, burnt, stolen, or taken on trust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū nissaṭṭhacīvaraṁ na denti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the monks from the group of six did not give back relinquished robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(…) “Na, bhikkhave, nissaṭṭhacīvaraṁ na dātabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, relinquished robe-cloth should be given back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo na dadeyya, āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t give it back, you commit an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathinasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on the robe-making season, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
