<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc84_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on precious things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">84. Ratanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">84. The training rule on precious things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu aciravatiyā nadiyā nahāyati. Aññataropi brāhmaṇo pañcasatānaṁ thavikaṁ thale nikkhipitvā aciravatiyā nadiyā nahāyanto vissaritvā agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk was bathing in the river Aciravatī, when a brahmin, too, came there to bathe. He deposited a bag with five hundred coins on the ground, bathed, forgot about the bag, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu—“tassāyaṁ brāhmaṇassa thavikā, mā idha nassī”ti aggahesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk thought, “This is the bag belonging to that brahmin; it wouldn’t be nice if it got lost,” and he picked it up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo saritvā turito ādhāvitvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—“api me, bho, thavikaṁ passeyyāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon the brahmin remembered. He hurried back and asked that monk, “Sir, did you see my bag?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Handa, brāhmaṇā”ti adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, “I did indeed,” he gave it to him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tassa brāhmaṇassa etadahosi—“kena nu kho ahaṁ upāyena imassa bhikkhuno puṇṇapattaṁ na dadeyyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmin thought, “How can I avoid giving a reward to this monk?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, bho, pañcasatāni, sahassaṁ me”ti palibundhetvā muñci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he said, “I didn’t have five hundred coins, I had a thousand!” And he seized hold of that monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu ārāmaṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After being released, that monk went to the monastery and told the monks what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu ratanaṁ uggahessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a monk pick up precious things?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, ratanaṁ uggahesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, ratanaṁ uggahessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu ratanaṁ vā ratanasammataṁ vā uggaṇheyya vā uggaṇhāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk picks up something precious or something regarded as precious, or he has it picked up, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyā ussavo hoti. Manussā alaṅkatappaṭiyattā uyyānaṁ gacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards they were holding a celebration in Sāvatthī, with people going to the park all dressed up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visākhāpi migāramātā alaṅkatappaṭiyattā “uyyānaṁ gamissāmī”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">as did Visākhā Migāramātā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāmato nikkhamitvā—“kyāhaṁ karissāmi uyyānaṁ gantvā, yannūnāhaṁ bhagavantaṁ payirupāseyyan”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">As she was leaving her village, she thought, “What will I do when I get to the park? Why don’t I pay a visit to the Buddha!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ābharaṇaṁ omuñcitvā uttarāsaṅgena bhaṇḍikaṁ bandhitvā dāsiyā adāsi—“handa, je, imaṁ bhaṇḍikaṁ gaṇhāhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She then removed all her ornaments, bound them in a bundle with her upper robe, and gave it to her slave girl, saying, “Listen, look after this bundle.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho visākhā migāramātā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Visākhā then went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ nisinnaṁ kho visākhaṁ migāramātaraṁ bhagavā dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṁsesi. Atha kho visākhā migāramātā bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṁsitā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the Buddha instructed, inspired, and gladdened her with a teaching, after which she got up from her seat, bowed down, circumambulated him with her right side toward him, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā dāsī taṁ bhaṇḍikaṁ vissaritvā agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the slave girl left too, forgetting the bundle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū passitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ. “Tena hi, bhikkhave, uggahetvā nikkhipathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks saw it and told the Buddha. “Well then, monks, pick it up and put it aside.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, ratanaṁ vā ratanasammataṁ vā ajjhārāme uggahetvā vā uggahāpetvā vā nikkhipituṁ—‘yassa bhavissati so harissatī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Within a monastery, monks, you should pick up precious things or what’s regarded as precious, or have it picked up, and then put it aside with the thought, ‘Whoever owns this will come and get it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu ratanaṁ vā ratanasammataṁ vā, aññatra ajjhārāmā, uggaṇheyya vā uggaṇhāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk picks up something precious or something regarded as precious, or he has it picked up, except within a monastery, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena kāsīsu janapade anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa kammantagāmo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the householder Anāthapiṇḍika had a whole village working for him in the country of Kāsī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena ca gahapatinā antevāsī āṇatto hoti—“sace bhadantā āgacchanti, bhattaṁ kareyyāsī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he had told an apprentice there that if the monks arrived he should make them a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū kāsīsu janapade cārikaṁ caramānā yena anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa kammantagāmo tenupasaṅkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a number of monks were wandering in the country of Kāsī, when they came to that village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho so puriso te bhikkhū dūratova āgacchante. Disvāna yena te bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te bhikkhū abhivādetvā etadavoca—“adhivāsentu, bhante, ayyā svātanāya gahapatino bhattan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When that man saw them coming, he approached them, bowed, and said, “Venerables, please accept a meal from Anāthapiṇḍika tomorrow.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesuṁ kho te bhikkhū tuṇhībhāvena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks accepted by remaining silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso tassā rattiyā accayena paṇītaṁ khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ paṭiyādāpetvā kālaṁ ārocāpetvā aṅgulimuddikaṁ omuñcitvā te bhikkhū bhattena parivisitvā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The following morning, after having various kinds of fine food prepared, he had the monks informed that it was time for the meal. He removed a ring from his finger and then offered the food to the monks, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyā bhuñjitvā gacchantu, ahampi kammantaṁ gamissāmī”ti aṅgulimuddikaṁ vissaritvā agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, please leave after you’ve eaten. I have to go to work.” And he left, forgetting his ring. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū passitvā—“sace mayaṁ gamissāma nassissatāyaṁ aṅgulimuddikā”ti tattheva acchiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks saw it and said, “If we just go, this ring will be lost,” and so they stayed right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso kammantā āgacchanto te bhikkhū passitvā etadavoca—“kissa, bhante, ayyā idheva acchantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">When that man returned from work, he saw the monks and said to them, “Why are you still here?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū tassa purisassa etamatthaṁ ārocetvā</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the monks told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those monks then went to Sāvatthī where they told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving a teaching, the Buddha addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, ratanaṁ vā ratanasammataṁ vā ajjhārāme vā ajjhāvasathe vā uggahetvā vā uggahāpetvā vā nikkhipituṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Within a monastery, monks, or inside a lodging, you should pick up precious things or what’s regarded as precious, or have it picked up, and then put it aside with the thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yassa bhavissati so harissatī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Whoever owns this will come and get it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu ratanaṁ vā ratanasammataṁ vā, aññatra ajjhārāmā vā ajjhāvasathā vā, uggaṇheyya vā uggaṇhāpeyya vā, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk picks up something precious or something regarded as precious, or he has it picked up, except within a monastery or inside a lodging, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanaṁ vā pana bhikkhunā ratanasammataṁ vā ajjhārāme vā ajjhāvasathe vā uggahetvā vā uggahāpetvā vā nikkhipitabbaṁ—‘yassa bhavissati so harissatī’ti. Ayaṁ tattha sāmīcī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he picks up something precious or something regarded as precious, or he has it picked up, within a monastery or inside a lodging, he should put it aside with the thought, “Whoever owns it will fetch it.” This is the proper procedure.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Something precious: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muttā maṇi veḷuriyo saṅkho silā pavālaṁ rajataṁ jātarūpaṁ lohitaṅko masāragallaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a pearl, a gem, a beryl, mother-of-pearl, quartz, a coral, silver, gold, a ruby, a cat’s eye. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanasammataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Something regarded as precious: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ manussānaṁ upabhogaparibhogaṁ, etaṁ ratanasammataṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever people regard as valuable or useful—this is called “regarded as precious”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra ajjhārāmā vā ajjhāvasathā vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except within a monastery or inside a lodging: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā ajjhārāmaṁ ajjhāvasathaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from within a monastery or inside a lodging. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhārāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Within a monastery: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parikkhittassa ārāmassa anto ārāmo, aparikkhittassa upacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monastery is enclosed, then within the enclosure. If the monastery is unenclosed, then in the vicinity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhāvasatho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Inside a lodging: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parikkhittassa āvasathassa anto āvasatho, aparikkhittassa upacāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the lodging is enclosed, then within the enclosure. If the lodging is unenclosed, then in the vicinity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uggaṇheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Picks up: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ gaṇhāti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he takes hold of it himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uggaṇhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has picked up: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ gāhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets someone else to take hold of it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanaṁ vā pana bhikkhunā ratanasammataṁ vā ajjhārāme vā ajjhāvasathe vā uggahetvā vā uggahāpetvā vā nikkhipitabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he picks up something precious or something regarded as precious, or he has it picked up, within a monastery or inside a lodging, he should put it aside: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpena vā nimittena vā saññāṇaṁ katvā nikkhipitvā ācikkhitabbaṁ—“yassa bhaṇḍaṁ naṭṭhaṁ so āgacchatū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">after taking note of its appearance or distinguishing marks, he should put it aside, and then make an announcement: “Whoever has lost anything should come.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace tattha āgacchati so vattabbo—“āvuso, kīdisaṁ te bhaṇḍan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">If anyone comes, they should be told, “Please describe your goods.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace rūpena vā nimittena vā sampādeti dātabbaṁ, no ce sampādeti “vicināhi, āvuso”ti vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they rightly describe the appearance or distinguishing marks, it should be given to them. If they do not, they should be told, “Keep looking.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamhā āvāsā pakkamantena ye tattha honti bhikkhū patirūpā, tesaṁ hatthe nikkhipitvā pakkamitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that monk is leaving that monastery, he should first place those goods into the hands of suitable monks there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce honti bhikkhū patirūpā, ye tattha honti gahapatikā patirūpā, tesaṁ hatthe nikkhipitvā pakkamitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If there are no suitable monks, he should place those goods into the hands of suitable householders there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ tattha sāmīcīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the proper procedure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṁ tattha anudhammatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the right method. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ratanaṁ vā ratanasammataṁ vā ajjhārāme vā ajjhāvasathe vā uggahetvā vā uggahāpetvā vā nikkhipati—“yassa bhavissati so harissatī”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he picks up something precious or something regarded as precious, or he has it picked up, within a monastery or inside a lodging, and then puts it aside with the thought, “Whoever owns it will fetch it;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ratanasammataṁ vissāsaṁ gaṇhāti, tāvakālikaṁ gaṇhāti, paṁsukūlasaññissa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">if he takes something regarded as precious on trust or he borrows it or he perceives it as discarded; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on precious things, the second, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
