<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.068-68. Dhammaññūsutta  - 68. One Who Knows the Teachings </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.068. 68. Dhammaññūsutta  - 68. One Who Knows the Teachings </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Mahāvagga  - 7. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A mendicant with seven qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhammaññū ca hoti atthaññū ca attaññū ca mattaññū ca kālaññū ca parisaññū ca puggalaparoparaññū ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant knows the teachings, knows the meaning, has self-knowledge, knows moderation, knows the right time, knows assemblies, and knows people high and low. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhammaññū hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant one who knows the teachings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhammaṃ jānāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant knows the teachings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ geyyaṃ veyyākaraṇaṃ gāthaṃ udānaṃ itivuttakaṃ jātakaṃ abbhutadhammaṃ vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhammaṃ jāneyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant did not know these teachings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ geyyaṃ … pe … abbhutadhammaṃ vedallaṃ, nayidha ‘dhammaññū’ti vucceyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they would not be called ‘one who knows the teachings’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhammaṃ jānāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But because they do know these teachings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ geyyaṃ … pe … abbhutadhammaṃ vedallaṃ, tasmā ‘dhammaññū’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they are called ‘one who knows the teachings’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti dhammaññū. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is the one who knows the teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthaññū ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are they one who knows the meaning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tassa tasseva bhāsitassa atthaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant knows the meaning of this or that statement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ imassa bhāsitassa attho, ayaṃ imassa bhāsitassa attho’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is what that statement means; that is what this statement means.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tassa tasseva bhāsitassa atthaṃ jāneyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant did not know the meaning of this or that statement, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ imassa bhāsitassa attho, ayaṃ imassa bhāsitassa attho’ti, nayidha ‘atthaññū’ti vucceyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they would not be called ‘one who knows the meaning’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tassa tasseva bhāsitassa atthaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because they do know the meaning of this or that statement, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ imassa bhāsitassa attho, ayaṃ imassa bhāsitassa attho’ti, tasmā ‘atthaññū’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they are called ‘one who knows the meaning’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti dhammaññū, atthaññū. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is the one who knows the teachings and the one who knows the meaning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attaññū ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are they one who has self-knowledge? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu attānaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has self-knowledge: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakomhi saddhāya sīlena sutena cāgena paññāya paṭibhānenā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the extent of my faith, ethics, learning, generosity, wisdom, and eloquence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu attānaṃ jāneyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant did not have self-knowledge, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakomhi saddhāya sīlena sutena cāgena paññāya paṭibhānenā’ti, nayidha ‘attaññū’ti vucceyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they would not be called ‘one who has self-knowledge’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu attānaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because they do have self-knowledge, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakomhi saddhāya sīlena sutena cāgena paññāya paṭibhānenā’ti, tasmā ‘attaññū’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they are called ‘one who has self-knowledge’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti dhammaññū, atthaññū, attaññū. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is the one who knows the teachings, the one who knows the meaning, and the one who has self-knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mattaññū ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are they one who knows moderation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mattaṃ jānāti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ paṭiggahaṇāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant knows moderation when receiving robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mattaṃ jāneyya cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ paṭiggahaṇāya, nayidha ‘mattaññū’ti vucceyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant did not know moderation, they would not be called ‘one who knows moderation’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mattaṃ jānāti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ paṭiggahaṇāya, tasmā ‘mattaññū’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because they do know moderation, they are called ‘one who knows moderation’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti dhammaññū, atthaññū, attaññū, mattaññū. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is the one who knows the teachings, the one who knows the meaning, the one who has self-knowledge, and the one who knows moderation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālaññū ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are they one who knows the right time? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kālaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant knows the right time: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ kālo uddesassa, ayaṃ kālo paripucchāya, ayaṃ kālo yogassa, ayaṃ kālo paṭisallānassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is the time for recitation; this is the time for questioning; this is the time for meditation; this is the time for retreat.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kālaṃ jāneyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant did not know the right time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ kālo uddesassa, ayaṃ kālo paripucchāya, ayaṃ kālo yogassa, ayaṃ kālo paṭisallānassā’ti, nayidha ‘kālaññū’ti vucceyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they would not be called ‘one who knows the right time’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kālaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because they do know the right time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ kālo uddesassa, ayaṃ kālo paripucchāya, ayaṃ kālo yogassa, ayaṃ kālo paṭisallānassā’ti, tasmā ‘kālaññū’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they are called ‘one who knows the right time’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti dhammaññū, atthaññū, attaññū, mattaññū, kālaññū. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is the one who knows the teachings, the one who knows the meaning, the one who has self-knowledge, the one who knows moderation, and the one who knows the right time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisaññū ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are they one who knows assemblies? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu parisaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant knows assemblies: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ khattiyaparisā, ayaṃ brāhmaṇaparisā, ayaṃ gahapatiparisā, ayaṃ samaṇaparisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is an assembly of aristocrats, of brahmins, of householders, or of ascetics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha evaṃ upasaṅkamitabbaṃ, evaṃ ṭhātabbaṃ, evaṃ kattabbaṃ, evaṃ nisīditabbaṃ, evaṃ bhāsitabbaṃ, evaṃ tuṇhī bhavitabban’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This one should be approached in this way. This is how to stand, to act, to sit, to speak, or to stay silent when there.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu parisaṃ jāneyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant did not know assemblies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ khattiyaparisā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ tuṇhī bhavitabban’ti, nayidha ‘parisaññū’ti vucceyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they would not be called ‘one who knows assemblies’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu parisaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But because they do know assemblies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ khattiyaparisā, ayaṃ brāhmaṇaparisā, ayaṃ gahapatiparisā, ayaṃ samaṇaparisā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha evaṃ upasaṅkamitabbaṃ, evaṃ ṭhātabbaṃ, evaṃ kattabbaṃ, evaṃ nisīditabbaṃ, evaṃ bhāsitabbaṃ, evaṃ tuṇhī bhavitabban’ti, tasmā ‘parisaññū’ti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they are called ‘one who knows assemblies’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti dhammaññū, atthaññū, attaññū, mattaññū, kālaññū, parisaññū. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such is the one who knows the teachings, the one who knows the meaning, the one who has self-knowledge, the one who knows moderation, the one who knows the right time, and the one who knows assemblies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalaparoparaññū ca kathaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how are they one who knows people high and low? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno dvayena puggalā viditā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant understands people in terms of pairs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve puggalā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two people: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eko ariyānaṃ dassanakāmo, eko ariyānaṃ na dassanakāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one likes to see the noble ones, one does not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo ariyānaṃ na dassanakāmo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who doesn’t like to see the noble ones </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena gārayho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reprehensible in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo ariyānaṃ dassanakāmo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who does like to see the noble ones </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena pāsaṃso. (7.1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is praiseworthy in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve puggalā ariyānaṃ dassanakāmā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two people like to see the noble ones: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eko saddhammaṃ sotukāmo, eko saddhammaṃ na sotukāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one likes to hear the true teaching, one does not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo saddhammaṃ na sotukāmo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who doesn’t like to hear the true teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena gārayho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reprehensible in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo saddhammaṃ sotukāmo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who does like to hear the true teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena pāsaṃso. (7.2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is praiseworthy in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve puggalā saddhammaṃ sotukāmā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two people like to hear the true teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eko ohitasoto dhammaṃ suṇāti, eko anohitasoto dhammaṃ suṇāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one lends an ear to the teaching, one does not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo anohitasoto dhammaṃ suṇāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who doesn’t lend an ear to the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena gārayho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reprehensible in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo ohitasoto dhammaṃ suṇāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who does lend an ear to the teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena pāsaṃso. (7.3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is praiseworthy in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve puggalā ohitasotā dhammaṃ suṇanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two people lend an ear to the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eko sutvā dhammaṃ dhāreti, eko sutvā dhammaṃ na dhāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one remembers the teaching they’ve heard, one does not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo sutvā na dhammaṃ dhāreti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who doesn’t remember the teaching they’ve heard </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena gārayho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reprehensible in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo sutvā dhammaṃ dhāreti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who does remember the teaching they’ve heard </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena pāsaṃso. (7.4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is praiseworthy in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve puggalā sutvā dhammaṃ dhārenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two people remember the teaching they’ve heard: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eko dhātānaṃ dhammānaṃ atthaṃ upaparikkhati, eko dhātānaṃ dhammānaṃ atthaṃ na upaparikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one reflects on the meaning of the teachings they have remembered, one does not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo dhātānaṃ dhammānaṃ atthaṃ na upaparikkhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who does not reflect on the meaning of the teachings they have remembered </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena gārayho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reprehensible in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo dhātānaṃ dhammānaṃ atthaṃ upaparikkhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who does reflect on the meaning of the teachings they have remembered </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena pāsaṃso. (7.5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is praiseworthy in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve puggalā dhātānaṃ dhammānaṃ atthaṃ upaparikkhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two people reflect on the meaning of the teachings they have remembered: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eko atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya dhammānudhammappaṭipanno, eko atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya na dhammānudhammappaṭipanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one understands the meaning and the teaching and practices accordingly, one understands the meaning and the teaching but does not practice accordingly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya na dhammānudhammappaṭipanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who understands the meaning and the teaching but does not practice accordingly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena gārayho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reprehensible in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya dhammānudhammappaṭipanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who understands the meaning and the teaching and practices accordingly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena pāsaṃso. (7.6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is praiseworthy in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve puggalā atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya dhammānudhammappaṭipannā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two people understand the meaning and the teaching and practice accordingly: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eko attahitāya paṭipanno no parahitāya, eko attahitāya ca paṭipanno parahitāya ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one practices to benefit themselves but not others, and one practices to benefit both themselves and others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo attahitāya paṭipanno no parahitāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who practices to benefit themselves but not others </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena gārayho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reprehensible in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yvāyaṃ puggalo attahitāya ca paṭipanno parahitāya ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person who practices to benefit both themselves and others </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena pāsaṃso. (7.7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is praiseworthy in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno dvayena puggalā viditā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant understands people in terms of pairs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu puggalaparoparaññū hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is one who knows people high and low. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti pāhuneyyo … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these seven factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
