<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.016-16. Aniccānupassīsutta  - 16. Observing Impermanence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.016. 16. Aniccānupassīsutta  - 16. Observing Impermanence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Anusayavagga  - 2. Tendencies </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, bhikkhave, puggalā āhuneyyā pāhuneyyā dakkhiṇeyyā añjalikaraṇīyā anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sabbasaṅkhāresu aniccānupassī viharati, aniccasaññī, aniccapaṭisaṃvedī satataṃ samitaṃ abbokiṇṇaṃ cetasā adhimuccamāno paññāya pariyogāhamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">First, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in all conditions. They perceive impermanence and experience impermanence. Constantly, continually, and without stopping, they apply the mind and fathom with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So āsavānaṃ khayā … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’ve realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo puggalo āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, idhekacco puggalo sabbasaṅkhāresu aniccānupassī viharati, aniccasaññī, aniccapaṭisaṃvedī satataṃ samitaṃ abbokiṇṇaṃ cetasā adhimuccamāno paññāya pariyogāhamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in all conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa apubbaṃ acarimaṃ āsavapariyādānañca hoti jīvitapariyādānañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their defilements and their life come to an end at exactly the same time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo puggalo āhuneyyo … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, idhekacco puggalo sabbasaṅkhāresu aniccānupassī viharati, aniccasaññī, aniccapaṭisaṃvedī satataṃ samitaṃ abbokiṇṇaṃ cetasā adhimuccamāno paññāya pariyogāhamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in all conditions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā antarāparinibbāyī hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished between one life and the next. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upahaccaparinibbāyī hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished upon landing. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished without extra effort. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished with extra effort. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddhaṃsoto hoti akaniṭṭhagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sattamo puggalo āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta puggalā āhuneyyā pāhuneyyā dakkhiṇeyyā añjalikaraṇīyā anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
