<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.095-95  - 95 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.095. 95  - 95 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Āhuneyyavagga  - 10. Worthy of Offerings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, bhikkhave, puggalā āhuneyyā … pe … dakkhiṇeyyā añjalikaraṇīyā anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo cakkhusmiṃ aniccānupassī viharati aniccasaññī aniccapaṭisaṃvedī satataṃ samitaṃ abbokiṇṇaṃ cetasā adhimuccamāno paññāya pariyogāhamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">First, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. They perceive impermanence and experience impermanence. Constantly, continually, and without stopping, they apply the mind and fathom with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhave, paṭhamo puggalo āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first person who is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, idhekacco puggalo cakkhusmiṃ aniccānupassī viharati aniccasaññī aniccapaṭisaṃvedī satataṃ samitaṃ abbokiṇṇaṃ cetasā adhimuccamāno paññāya pariyogāhamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa apubbaṃ acarimaṃ āsavapariyādānañca hoti jīvitapariyādānañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their defilements and their life come to an end at exactly the same time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo puggalo āhuneyyo … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second person who is worthy of offerings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, idhekacco puggalo cakkhusmiṃ aniccānupassī viharati aniccasaññī aniccapaṭisaṃvedī satataṃ samitaṃ abbokiṇṇaṃ cetasā adhimuccamāno paññāya pariyogāhamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā antarāparinibbāyī hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished between one life and the next. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upahaccaparinibbāyī hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished upon landing. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished without extra effort. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished with extra effort. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddhaṃsoto hoti akaniṭṭhagāmī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sattamo puggalo āhuneyyo … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta puggalā āhuneyyā pāhuneyyā dakkhiṇeyyā añjalikaraṇīyā anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
