<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.001-1. Paṭhamapiyasutta  - 1. Pleasing (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.001. 1. Paṭhamapiyasutta  - 1. Pleasing (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Dhanavagga  - 1. Wealth </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is disliked and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu lābhakāmo ca hoti, sakkārakāmo ca hoti, anavaññattikāmo ca hoti, ahiriko ca hoti, anottappī ca, pāpiccho ca, micchādiṭṭhi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant desires material possessions, honor, and to be looked up to. They lack conscience and prudence. They have wicked desires and wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these seven qualities is disliked and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti, manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with seven qualities is liked and approved by their spiritual companions, respected and admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na lābhakāmo ca hoti, na sakkārakāmo ca hoti, na anavaññattikāmo ca hoti, hirīmā ca hoti, ottappī ca, appiccho ca, sammādiṭṭhi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t desire material possessions, honor, and to be looked up to. They have conscience and prudence. They have few desires and right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these seven qualities is liked and approved by their spiritual companions, respected and admired.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
