<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.058-58. Arakkheyyasutta  - 58. Nothing to Hide </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.058. 58. Arakkheyyasutta  - 58. Nothing to Hide </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Abyākatavagga  - 6. The Undeclared Points </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, tathāgatassa arakkheyyāni, tīhi ca anupavajjo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are four areas where the Realized One has nothing to hide, and three ways he is irreproachable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri tathāgatassa arakkheyyāni? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the four areas where the Realized One has nothing to hide? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhakāyasamācāro, bhikkhave, tathāgato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">His bodily behavior is pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi tathāgatassa kāyaduccaritaṃ yaṃ tathāgato rakkheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Realized One has no bodily misconduct to hide, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me idaṃ paro aññāsī’ti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Don’t let others find this out about me!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhavacīsamācāro, bhikkhave, tathāgato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">His verbal behavior is pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi tathāgatassa vacīduccaritaṃ yaṃ tathāgato rakkheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Realized One has no verbal misconduct to hide, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me idaṃ paro aññāsī’ti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Don’t let others find this out about me!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhamanosamācāro, bhikkhave, tathāgato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">His mental behavior is pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi tathāgatassa manoduccaritaṃ yaṃ tathāgato rakkheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Realized One has no mental misconduct to hide, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me idaṃ paro aññāsī’ti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Don’t let others find this out about me!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhājīvo, bhikkhave, tathāgato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">His livelihood is pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi tathāgatassa micchāājīvo yaṃ tathāgato rakkheyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Realized One has no wrong livelihood to hide, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā me idaṃ paro aññāsī’ti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Don’t let others find this out about me!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni cattāri tathāgatassa arakkheyyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four areas where the Realized One has nothing to hide. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi anupavajjo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the three ways the Realized One is irreproachable? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svākkhātadhammo, bhikkhave, tathāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has explained the teaching well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi tvaṃ na svākkhātadhammo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘For such and such reasons you haven’t explained the teaching well.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimittametaṃ, bhikkhave, na samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamahaṃ, bhikkhave, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Supaññattā kho pana me, bhikkhave, sāvakānaṃ nibbānagāminī paṭipadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have clearly described the practice that leads to extinguishment for my disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāpaṭipannā mama sāvakā āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Practicing in accordance with this, my disciples realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi te na supaññattā sāvakānaṃ nibbānagāminī paṭipadā. Yathāpaṭipannā tava sāvakā āsavānaṃ khayā … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja viharantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘For such and such reasons you haven’t clearly described the practice that leads to extinguishment for your disciples.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimittametaṃ, bhikkhave, na samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamahaṃ, bhikkhave, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anekasatā kho pana me, bhikkhave, sāvakaparisā āsavānaṃ khayā … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Many hundreds in my assembly of disciples have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi te na anekasatā sāvakaparisā āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘For such and such reasons you don’t have many hundreds of disciples in your following who have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and who live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimittametaṃ, bhikkhave, na samanupassāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamahaṃ, bhikkhave, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi tīhi anupavajjo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three ways the Realized One is irreproachable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri tathāgatassa arakkheyyāni, imehi ca tīhi anupavajjo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four areas where the Realized One has nothing to hide, and the three ways he is irreproachable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
