<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.028-28. Paṭhamaparihānisutta  - 28. Non-decline for a Mendicant Trainee </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.028. 28. Paṭhamaparihānisutta  - 28. Non-decline for a Mendicant Trainee </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Vajjisattakavagga  - 3. The Vajji Seven </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sattime, bhikkhave, dhammā sekhassa bhikkhuno parihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These seven things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammārāmatā, bhassārāmatā, niddārāmatā, saṅgaṇikārāmatā, indriyesu aguttadvāratā, bhojane amattaññutā, santi kho pana saṃghe saṃghakaraṇīyāni; tatra sekho bhikkhu iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They don’t guard the sense doors and they eat too much. And when there is Saṅgha business to be carried out, they don’t reflect: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘santi kho pana saṃghe therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā bhāravāhino, te tena paññāyissantī’ti attanā tesu yogaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are senior mendicants in the Saṅgha of long standing, long gone forth, responsible. They’ll be known for taking care of this.’ So they try to do it themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta dhammā sekhassa bhikkhuno parihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattime, bhikkhave, dhammā sekhassa bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kammārāmatā, na bhassārāmatā, na niddārāmatā, na saṅgaṇikārāmatā, indriyesu guttadvāratā, bhojane mattaññutā, santi kho pana saṅghe saṅghakaraṇīyāni; tatra sekho bhikkhu iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They guard the sense doors and don’t they eat too much. And when there is Saṅgha business to be carried out, they reflect: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘santi kho pana saṅghe therā rattaññū cirapabbajitā bhāravāhino, te tena paññāyissantī’ti attanā na tesu yogaṃ āpajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are senior mendicants in the Saṅgha of long standing, long gone forth, responsible. They’ll be known for taking care of this.’ So they don’t try to do it themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta dhammā sekhassa bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
