<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.006-6. Vitthatadhanasutta  - 6. Wealth in Detail </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.006. 6. Vitthatadhanasutta  - 6. Wealth in Detail </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Dhanavagga  - 1. Wealth </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattimāni, bhikkhave, dhanāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these seven kinds of wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhādhanaṃ, sīladhanaṃ, hirīdhanaṃ, ottappadhanaṃ, sutadhanaṃ, cāgadhanaṃ, paññādhanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The wealth of faith, ethical conduct, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, saddhādhanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the wealth of faith? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako saddho hoti, saddahati tathāgatassa bodhiṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho … pe … buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, saddhādhanaṃ. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the wealth of faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, sīladhanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the wealth of ethical conduct? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti … pe … surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical, or consume alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sīladhanaṃ. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the wealth of ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, hirīdhanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the wealth of conscience? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako hirīmā hoti, hirīyati kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena, hirīyati pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has a conscience. They’re conscientious about bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad, unskillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, hirīdhanaṃ. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the wealth of conscience. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, ottappadhanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the wealth of prudence? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ottappī hoti, ottappati kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena, ottappati pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple is prudent. They’re prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to the acquiring of any bad, unskillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ottappadhanaṃ. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the wealth of prudence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, sutadhanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the wealth of learning? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo. Ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti. Tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple is very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sutadhanaṃ. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the wealth of learning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, cāgadhanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the wealth of generosity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati muttacāgo payatapāṇi vosaggarato yācayogo dānasaṃvibhāgarato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, cāgadhanaṃ. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the wealth of generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, paññādhanaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the wealth of wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako paññavā hoti … pe … sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, paññādhanaṃ. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the wealth of wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, sattadhanānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven kinds of wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhādhanaṃ sīladhanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Faith and ethical conduct are kinds of wealth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hirī ottappiyaṃ dhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as are conscience and prudence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutadhanañca cāgo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">learning and generosity, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā ve sattamaṃ dhanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and wisdom is the seventh kind of wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa ete dhanā atthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a woman or man </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthiyā purisassa vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">has these kinds of wealth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaliddoti taṃ āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re said to be prosperous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amoghaṃ tassa jīvitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their life is not in vain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā saddhañca sīlañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So let the wise devote themselves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasādaṃ dhammadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to faith, ethical behavior, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyuñjetha medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">confidence, and insight into the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saraṃ buddhāna sāsanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
