<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.039-39. Dutiyapaṭisambhidāsutta  - 39. Textual Analysis (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.039. 39. Dutiyapaṭisambhidāsutta  - 39. Textual Analysis (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato sāriputto catasso paṭisambhidā sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, having seven qualities, Sāriputta realized the four kinds of textual analysis and lives having achieved them with his own insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, sāriputto ‘idaṃ me cetaso līnattan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when Sāriputta truly understood: ‘This is mental sluggishness’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattaṃ saṅkhittaṃ vā cittaṃ ‘ajjhattaṃ me saṅkhittaṃ cittan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He truly understood internally constricted mind as ‘internally constricted mind’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahiddhā vikkhittaṃ vā cittaṃ ‘bahiddhā me vikkhittaṃ cittan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He truly understood externally scattered mind as ‘externally scattered mind’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa viditā vedanā uppajjanti, viditā upaṭṭhahanti, viditā abbhatthaṃ gacchanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He knew feelings, perceptions, and thoughts as they arose, as they remained, and as they went away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viditā saññā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitakkā uppajjanti, viditā upaṭṭhahanti, viditā abbhatthaṃ gacchanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappāyāsappāyesu kho panassa dhammesu hīnappaṇītesu kaṇhasukkasappaṭibhāgesu nimittaṃ suggahitaṃ sumanasikataṃ sūpadhāritaṃ suppaṭividdhaṃ paññāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The patterns of qualities—suitable or unsuitable, inferior or superior, or those on the side of dark or bright—were properly grasped, attended, borne in mind, and comprehended with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato sāriputto catasso paṭisambhidā sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having these seven qualities, Sāriputta realized the four kinds of textual analysis and lives having achieved them with his own insight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
