<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.004-4. Vitthatabalasutta  - 4. Powers in Detail </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.004. 4. Vitthatabalasutta  - 4. Powers in Detail </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Dhanavagga  - 1. Wealth </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattimāni, bhikkhave, balāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these seven powers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhābalaṃ, vīriyabalaṃ, hirībalaṃ, ottappabalaṃ, satibalaṃ, samādhibalaṃ, paññābalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The powers of faith, energy, conscience, prudence, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, saddhābalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of faith? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako saddho hoti, saddahati tathāgatassa bodhiṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, saddhābalaṃ. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, vīriyabalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of energy? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya, thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vīriyabalaṃ. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of energy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, hirībalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of conscience? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako hirīmā hoti, hirīyati kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena, hirīyati pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has a conscience. They’re conscientious about bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and conscientious about acquiring any bad, unskillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, hirībalaṃ. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of conscience. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, ottappabalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of prudence? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ottappī hoti, ottappati kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena, ottappati pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple is prudent. They’re prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to the acquiring of any bad, unskillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ottappabalaṃ. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of prudence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, satibalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of mindfulness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako satimā hoti paramena satinepakkena samannāgato cirakatampi cirabhāsitampi saritā anussaritā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, satibalaṃ. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, samādhibalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of immersion? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako vivicceva kāmehi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, samādhibalaṃ. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, paññābalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, paññābalaṃ. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, satta balānīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven powers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhābalaṃ vīriyañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The powers are faith and energy, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hirī ottappiyaṃ balaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">conscience and prudence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satibalaṃ samādhi ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">mindfulness and immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā ve sattamaṃ balaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and wisdom as the seventh power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etehi balavā bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Empowered by these, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhaṃ jīvati paṇḍito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">an astute mendicant lives happily. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yoniso vicine dhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should examine the teaching rationally, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāyatthaṃ vipassati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">discerning the meaning with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pajjotasseva nibbānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The liberation of their heart </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimokkho hoti cetaso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is like a lamp going out.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
