<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.033-33. Hirigāravasutta  - 33. Respect for Conscience </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.033. 33. Hirigāravasutta  - 33. Respect for Conscience </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imaṃ, bhikkhave, rattiṃ aññatarā devatā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho, bhikkhave, sā devatā maṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, tonight, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, came to me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sattime, bhante, dhammā bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, these seven things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthugāravatā, dhammagāravatā, saṅghagāravatā, sikkhāgāravatā, samādhigāravatā, hirigāravatā, ottappagāravatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Respect for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the training, for immersion, for conscience, and for prudence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhante, satta dhammā bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca, bhikkhave, sā devatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what that deity said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvā maṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then he bowed and respectfully circled me, keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthugaru dhammagaru, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Respect for the Teacher and the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe ca tibbagāravo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and keen respect for the Saṅgha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhigaru ātāpī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">respect for immersion, being energetic, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhāya tibbagāravo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and keen respect for the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hiriottappasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">One with both conscience and prudence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappatisso sagāravo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">reverential and respectful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhabbo parihānāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">can’t decline, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbānasseva santike”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has drawn near to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
