<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.021-21. Sārandadasutta  - 21. At Sārandada </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.021. 21. Sārandadasutta  - 21. At Sārandada </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Vajjisattakavagga  - 3. The Vajji Seven </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati sārandade cetiye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Sārandada Tree-shrine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā licchavī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinne kho te licchavī bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several Licchavis went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and the Buddha said to these Licchavis: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“satta vo, licchavī, aparihāniye dhamme desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Licchavis, I will teach you these seven principles that prevent decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te licchavī bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katame ca, licchavī, satta aparihāniyā dhammā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what are the seven principles that prevent decline? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, licchavī, vajjī abhiṇhaṃ sannipātā bhavissanti sannipātabahulā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the Vajjis meet frequently and have many meetings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuddhiyeva, licchavī, vajjīnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, licchavī, vajjī samaggā sannipatissanti, samaggā vuṭṭhahissanti, samaggā vajjikaraṇīyāni karissanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the Vajjis meet in harmony, leave in harmony, and carry on their business in harmony, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuddhiyeva, licchavī, vajjīnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, licchavī, vajjī apaññattaṃ na paññāpessanti, paññattaṃ na samucchindissanti, yathāpaññatte porāṇe vajjidhamme samādāya vattissanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the Vajjis don’t make new decrees or abolish existing decrees, but undertake and follow the traditional Vajjian principles as they have been decreed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuddhiyeva, licchavī, vajjīnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, licchavī, vajjī ye te vajjīnaṃ vajjimahallakā te sakkarissanti garuṃ karissanti mānessanti pūjessanti, tesañca sotabbaṃ maññissanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate Vajjian elders, and think them worth listening to, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuddhiyeva, licchavī, vajjīnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, licchavī, vajjī yā tā kulitthiyo kulakumāriyo tā na okassa pasayha vāsessanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the Vajjis don’t rape or abduct women or girls from their families and force them to live with them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuddhiyeva, licchavī, vajjīnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, licchavī, vajjī yāni tāni vajjīnaṃ vajjicetiyāni abbhantarāni ceva bāhirāni ca tāni sakkarissanti garuṃ karissanti mānessanti pūjessanti, tesañca dinnapubbaṃ katapubbaṃ dhammikaṃ baliṃ no parihāpessanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the Vajjian shrines, whether inner or outer, not neglecting the proper spirit-offerings that were given and made in the past, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuddhiyeva, licchavī, vajjīnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, licchavī, vajjīnaṃ arahantesu dhammikā rakkhāvaraṇagutti susaṃvihitā bhavissati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the Vajjis arrange for proper protection, shelter, and security for perfected ones, so that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kinti anāgatā ca arahanto vijitaṃ āgaccheyyuṃ, āgatā ca arahanto vijite phāsuṃ vihareyyun’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">more perfected ones might come to the realm and those already here may live in comfort, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuddhiyeva, licchavī, vajjīnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, licchavī, ime satta aparihāniyā dhammā vajjīsu ṭhassanti, imesu ca sattasu aparihāniyesu dhammesu vajjī sandississanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the Vajjis, and as long as the Vajjis are seen following them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuddhiyeva, licchavī, vajjīnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can expect growth, not decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
