<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.060-60. Sattadhammasutta  - 60. Seven Qualities </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.060. 60. Sattadhammasutta  - 60. Seven Qualities </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Abyākatavagga  - 6. The Undeclared Points </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nacirasseva āsavānaṃ khayā … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities soon realizes the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. They live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddho hoti, sīlavā hoti, bahussuto hoti, paṭisallīno hoti, āraddhavīriyo hoti, satimā hoti, paññavā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is faithful, ethical, learned, secluded, energetic, mindful, and wise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nacirasseva āsavānaṃ khayā … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these seven qualities soon realizes the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. They live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
