<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.063-63. Bhariyāsutta  - 63. Kinds of Wives </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.063. 63. Bhariyāsutta  - 63. Kinds of Wives </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Abyākatavagga  - 6. The Undeclared Points </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, where he sat on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa nivesane manussā uccāsaddā mahāsaddā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time people in Anāthapiṇḍika’s home were making a dreadful racket. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṃ gahapatiṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ nu te, gahapati, nivesane manussā uccāsaddā mahāsaddā kevaṭṭā maññe macchavilope”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Householder, what’s with the people making that dreadful racket in your home? You’d think it was fishermen hauling in a catch!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayaṃ, bhante, sujātā gharasuṇhā aḍḍhakulā ānītā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, that’s my daughter-in-law Sujātā. She’s been brought here from a wealthy family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā neva sassuṃ ādiyati, na sasuraṃ ādiyati, na sāmikaṃ ādiyati, bhagavantampi na sakkaroti na garuṃ karoti na māneti na pūjetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She doesn’t obey her mother-in-law or father-in-law or her husband. And she does not honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sujātaṃ gharasuṇhaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha addressed Sujātā, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi, sujāte”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Sujātā.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho sujātā gharasuṇhā bhagavato paṭissutvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho sujātaṃ gharasuṇhaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” she replied. She went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satta kho imā, sujāte, purisassa bhariyāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sujātā, a man can have seven kinds of wife. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vadhakasamā, corīsamā, ayyasamā, mātāsamā, bhaginīsamā, sakhīsamā, dāsīsamā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wife like a killer, a wife like a thief, a wife like a lord, a wife like a mother, a wife like a sister, a wife like a friend, and a wife like a bondservant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, sujāte, satta purisassa bhariyāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the kinds of wife that a man can have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāsaṃ tvaṃ katamā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which one of these are you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho ahaṃ, bhante, imassa bhagavatā saṃkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I don’t understand the detailed meaning of what the Buddha has said in brief. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā tathā dhammaṃ desetu yathāhaṃ imassa bhagavatā saṃkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṃ jāneyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please teach me this matter so I can understand the detailed meaning.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, sujāte, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Sujātā, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho sujātā gharasuṇhā bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” she replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paduṭṭhacittā ahitānukampinī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“With a mind full of hate and no kindness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññesu rattā atimaññate patiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">lusting for others, looking down on her husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhanena kītassa vadhāya ussukā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">she longs to murder the one who paid the price for her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evarūpā purisassa bhariyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man’s wife of this sort </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Vadhā ca bhariyā’ti ca sā pavuccati. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called a wife and a killer. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ itthiyā vindati sāmiko dhanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman’s husband earns his wealth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sippaṃ vaṇijjañca kasiṃ adhiṭṭhahaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by applying oneself to a profession, trade, or farming. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appampi tassa apahātumicchati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And even if it’s only a little, she wants to take it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evarūpā purisassa bhariyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man’s wife of this sort </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Corī ca bhariyā’ti ca sā pavuccati. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called a wife and a thief. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akammakāmā alasā mahagghasā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s an idle glutton who doesn’t want to work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusā ca caṇḍī duruttavādinī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Her words are harsh, fierce, and rude. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṭṭhāyakānaṃ abhibhuyya vattati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She rules over him, though he rises early. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evarūpā purisassa bhariyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man’s wife of this sort </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ayyā ca bhariyā’ti ca sā pavuccati. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called a wife and a lord. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā sabbadā hoti hitānukampinī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s always caring and kind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātāva puttaṃ anurakkhate patiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">looking after her husband like a mother her child. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato dhanaṃ sambhatamassa rakkhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She keeps the wealth that he has earned secure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evarūpā purisassa bhariyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man’s wife of this sort </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mātā ca bhariyā’ti ca sā pavuccati. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called a wife and a mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāpi jeṭṭhā bhaginī kaniṭṭhakā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She respects her husband </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sagāravā hoti sakamhi sāmike; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a younger sister respects her elder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hirīmanā bhattuvasānuvattinī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Conscientious, she does what her husband says. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evarūpā purisassa bhariyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man’s wife of this sort </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Bhaginī ca bhariyā’ti ca sā pavuccati. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called a wife and a sister. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yācīdha disvāna patiṃ pamodati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s delighted to see him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakhī sakhāraṃva cirassamāgataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like one reunited with a long-lost friend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Koleyyakā sīlavatī patibbatā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s well-raised, virtuous, and devoted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evarūpā purisassa bhariyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man’s wife of this sort </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sakhī ca bhariyā’ti ca sā pavuccati. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called a wife and a friend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkuddhasantā vadhadaṇḍatajjitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She has no anger when threatened with violence by the rod. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aduṭṭhacittā patino titikkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without hate or anger, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkodhanā bhattuvasānuvattinī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">she endures her husband and does what he says. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evarūpā purisassa bhariyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man’s wife of this sort </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Dāsī ca bhariyā’ti ca sā pavuccati. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called a wife and a bondservant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yācīdha bhariyā vadhakāti vuccati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The kinds of wives here called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Corī ca ayyā’ti ca yā pavuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">killer, thief, and lord; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dussīlarūpā pharusā anādarā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">unethical, harsh, and lacking regard for others, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyassa bhedā nirayaṃ vajanti tā. (1–3.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">when their body breaks up they go to hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yācīdha mātā bhaginī sakhīti ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the kinds of wives here called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Dāsī ca bhariyā’ti ca sā pavuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">mother, sister, friend, and bondservant; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīle ṭhitattā cirarattasaṃvutā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">steadfast in their own morality, restrained for a long time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyassa bhedā sugatiṃ vajanti tāti. (4–7.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">when their body breaks up they go to a good place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, sujāte, satta purisassa bhariyāyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sujātā, these are the seven kinds of wife that a man can have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāsaṃ tvaṃ katamā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Which one of these are you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ajjatagge maṃ, bhante, bhagavā dāsīsamaṃ sāmikassa bhariyaṃ dhāretū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, from this day forth may the Buddha remember me as a wife like a bondservant.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
