<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.078-78. Catutthavinayadharasutta  - 78. An Expert in the Monastic Law (4th) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.078. 78. Catutthavinayadharasutta  - 78. An Expert in the Monastic Law (4th) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Vinayavagga  - 8. The Monastic Law </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu vinayadharo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is an expert in the monastic law. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattiṃ jānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know what is an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāpattiṃ jānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know what is not an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lahukaṃ āpattiṃ jānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know what is a light offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">garukaṃ āpattiṃ jānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know what is a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ, dvepi jātiyo … pe … iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu vinayadharo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these seven qualities is an expert in the monastic law.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
