<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.062-62. Mettasutta  - 62. Don’t Fear Good Deeds </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.062. 62. Mettasutta  - 62. Don’t Fear Good Deeds </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Abyākatavagga  - 6. The Undeclared Points </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā, bhikkhave, puññānaṃ bhāyittha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, don’t fear good deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhassetaṃ, bhikkhave, adhivacanaṃ yadidaṃ puññāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For ‘good deeds’ is a term for happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhijānāmi kho panāhaṃ, bhikkhave, dīgharattaṃ katānaṃ puññānaṃ dīgharattaṃ iṭṭhaṃ kantaṃ manāpaṃ vipākaṃ paccanubhūtaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I recall undergoing for a long time the likable, desirable, and agreeable results of good deeds performed over a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satta vassāni mettacittaṃ bhāvesiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I developed a mind of love for seven years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satta vassāni mettacittaṃ bhāvetvā satta saṃvaṭṭavivaṭṭakappe nayimaṃ lokaṃ punāgamāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result, for seven eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding I didn’t return to this world again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃvaṭṭamāne sudāhaṃ, bhikkhave, loke ābhassarūpago homi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the cosmos contracted I went to the realm of streaming radiance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vivaṭṭamāne loke suññaṃ brahmavimānaṃ upapajjāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As it expanded I was reborn in an empty mansion of Brahmā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra sudaṃ, bhikkhave, brahmā homi mahābrahmā abhibhū anabhibhūto aññadatthudaso vasavattī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There I was Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the undefeated, the champion, the universal seer, the wielder of power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattiṃsakkhattuṃ kho panāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sakko ahosiṃ devānamindo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I was Sakka, lord of gods, thirty-six times. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anekasatakkhattuṃ rājā ahosiṃ cakkavattī dhammiko dhammarājā cāturanto vijitāvī janapadatthāvariyappatto sattaratanasamannāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Many hundreds of times I was a king, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. My dominion extended to all four sides, I achieved stability in the country, and I possessed the seven treasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, imāni satta ratanāni ahesuṃ, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">These were my seven treasures: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkaratanaṃ, hatthiratanaṃ, assaratanaṃ, maṇiratanaṃ, itthiratanaṃ, gahapatiratanaṃ, pariṇāyakaratanameva sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and the counselor as the seventh treasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parosahassaṃ kho pana me, bhikkhave, puttā ahesuṃ sūrā vīraṅgarūpā parasenappamaddanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I had over a thousand sons who were valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of my enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ pathaviṃ sāgarapariyantaṃ adaṇḍena asatthena dhammena abhivijiya ajjhāvasinti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After conquering this land girt by sea, I reigned by principle, without rod or sword. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passa puññānaṃ vipākaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">See the result of good deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kusalānaṃ sukhesino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of skillful deeds, for one seeking happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mettaṃ cittaṃ vibhāvetvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I developed a mind of love </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satta vassāni bhikkhavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for seven years, mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattasaṃvaṭṭavivaṭṭakappe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For seven eons of expansion and contraction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nayimaṃ lokaṃ punāgamiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I didn’t return to this world again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃvaṭṭamāne lokamhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the world contracted </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">homi ābhassarūpago; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went to the realm of streaming radiance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivaṭṭamāne lokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when it expanded </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suññabrahmūpago ahuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went to an empty mansion of Brahmā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattakkhattuṃ mahābrahmā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seven times I was a Great Brahmā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vasavattī tadā ahuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and at that time I was the wielder of power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattiṃsakkhattuṃ devindo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thirty-six times I was lord of gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">devarajjamakārayiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">acting as ruler of the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkavattī ahuṃ rājā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then I was king, a wheel-turning monarch, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jambumaṇḍassa issaro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">ruler of all India. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muddhāvasitto khattiyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An anointed aristocrat, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussādhipatī ahuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I was sovereign of all humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adaṇḍena asatthena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without rod or sword, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vijeyya pathaviṃ imaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I conquered this land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asāhasena kammena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Through non-violent action </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samena manusāsi taṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I guided it justly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammena rajjaṃ kāretvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After ruling this territory </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asmiṃ pathavimaṇḍale; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by means of principle, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahaddhane mahābhoge, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I was born in a rich family, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍhe ajāyihaṃ kule. </span></p>
<p class="p3">affluent and wealthy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbakāmehi sampanne, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It was replete with all sense pleasures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ratanehi ca sattahi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the seven treasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddhā saṅgāhakā loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was well taught by the Buddhas, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tehi etaṃ sudesitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">who bring the world together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso hetu mahantassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause of greatness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pathabyo me na vipajjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by which one is called a lord of the land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahūtavittūpakaraṇo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I was a majestic king, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā hoti patāpavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with lots of property and assets. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iddhimā yasavā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Successful and glorious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jambumaṇḍassa issaro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I was lord of India. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko sutvā nappasīdeyya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who would not be inspired by this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api kaṇhābhijātiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">even someone of dark birth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi attakāmena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore someone who loves themselves, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahattamabhikaṅkhatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">aspiring to transcendence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhammo garukātabbo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">should respect the true teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saraṃ buddhānasāsanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
