<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.013-13. Kulasutta  - 13. A Family </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.013. 13. Kulasutta  - 13. A Family </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Anusayavagga  - 2. Tendencies </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgataṃ kulaṃ anupagantvā vā nālaṃ upagantuṃ, upagantvā vā nālaṃ upanisīdituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, visiting a family with seven factors is not worthwhile, or if you’ve already arrived, sitting down is not worthwhile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na manāpena paccuṭṭhenti, na manāpena abhivādenti, na manāpena āsanaṃ denti, santamassa pariguhanti, bahukampi thokaṃ denti, paṇītampi lūkhaṃ denti, asakkaccaṃ denti no sakkaccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t politely rise, bow, or offer a seat. They hide what they have. Even when they have much they give little. Even when they have refined things they give coarse things. They give carelessly, not carefully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi aṅgehi samannāgataṃ kulaṃ anupagantvā vā nālaṃ upagantuṃ, upagantvā vā nālaṃ upanisīdituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Visiting a family with these seven factors is not worthwhile, or if you’ve already arrived, sitting down is not worthwhile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgataṃ kulaṃ anupagantvā vā alaṃ upagantuṃ, upagantvā vā alaṃ upanisīdituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Visiting a family with seven factors is worthwhile, or if you’ve already arrived, sitting down is worthwhile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manāpena paccuṭṭhenti, manāpena abhivādenti, manāpena āsanaṃ denti, santamassa na pariguhanti, bahukampi bahukaṃ denti, paṇītampi paṇītaṃ denti, sakkaccaṃ denti no asakkaccaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They politely rise, bow, and offer a seat. They don’t hide what they have. When they have much they give much. When they have refined things they give refined things. They give carefully, not carelessly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi aṅgehi samannāgataṃ kulaṃ anupagantvā vā alaṃ upagantuṃ, upagantvā vā alaṃ upanisīditun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Visiting a family with these seven factors is worthwhile, or if you’ve already arrived, sitting down is worthwhile.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
