<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.037-37. Dutiyamittasutta  - 37. A Friend (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.037. 37. Dutiyamittasutta  - 37. A Friend (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu mitto sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo api panujjamānenapi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a friend has seven qualities you should associate with, accompany, and attend them, even if they send you away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo ca vattā ca vacanakkhamo ca gambhīrañca kathaṃ kattā hoti, no ca aṭṭhāne niyojeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re likable, agreeable, respected, and admired. They admonish you and they accept admonishment. They speak on deep matters. And they don’t urge you to do bad things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu mitto sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo api panujjamānenapīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a friend has these seven qualities you should associate with, accompany, and attend them, even if they send you away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyo garu bhāvanīyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re lovable, respected, and admired, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vattā ca vacanakkhamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">an admonisher who accepts admonishment, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gambhīrañca kathaṃ kattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">speaks on deep matters, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no caṭṭhāne niyojako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and doesn’t urge you to do bad. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yamhi etāni ṭhānāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person in whom </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃvijjantīdha puggale; </span></p>
<p class="p3">these things are found is your friend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So mitto mittakāmena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you want to have a friend, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthakāmānukampato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">benevolent and compassionate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api nāsiyamānena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should keep company with such a person, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhajitabbo tathāvidho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">even if they send you away.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
