<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.084-84. Adhikaraṇasamathasutta  - 84. Settlement of Disciplinary Issues </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.084. 84. Adhikaraṇasamathasutta  - 84. Settlement of Disciplinary Issues </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Vinayavagga  - 8. The Monastic Law </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, bhikkhave, adhikaraṇasamathā dhammā uppannuppannānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ samathāya vūpasamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these seven principles for the settlement of any disciplinary issues that might arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammukhāvinayo dātabbo, sativinayo dātabbo, amūḷhavinayo dātabbo, paṭiññātakaraṇaṃ dātabbaṃ, yebhuyyasikā dātabbā, tassapāpiyasikā dātabbā, tiṇavatthārako dātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removal in the presence of those concerned is applicable. Removal by accurate recollection is applicable. Removal due to recovery from madness is applicable. The acknowledgement of the offense is applicable. The decision of a majority is applicable. A verdict of aggravated misconduct is applicable. Covering over with grass is applicable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta adhikaraṇasamathā dhammā uppannuppannānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ samathāya vūpasamāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven principles for the settlement of any disciplinary issues that might arise.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vinayavaggo aṭṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caturo vinayadharā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">caturo ceva sobhanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāsanaṃ adhikaraṇa—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samathenaṭṭhame dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
