<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.051-51. Saṃyogasutta  - 51. Bound and Unbound </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.051. 51. Saṃyogasutta  - 51. Bound and Unbound </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Mahāyaññavagga  - 5. A Great Sacrifice </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saṃyogavisaṃyogaṃ vo, bhikkhave, dhammapariyāyaṃ desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching on the bound and the unbound. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katamo ca so, bhikkhave, saṃyogo visaṃyogo dhammapariyāyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the exposition of the teaching on the bound and the unbound? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī, bhikkhave, ajjhattaṃ itthindriyaṃ manasi karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman focuses on her own femininity: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthikuttaṃ itthākappaṃ itthividhaṃ itthicchandaṃ itthissaraṃ itthālaṅkāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">her feminine moves, feminine appearance, feminine ways, feminine desires, feminine voice, and feminine adornment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tattha rajjati tatrābhiramati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s stimulated by this and takes pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tattha rattā tatrābhiratā bahiddhā purisindriyaṃ manasi karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So she focuses on the masculinity of others: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisakuttaṃ purisākappaṃ purisavidhaṃ purisacchandaṃ purisassaraṃ purisālaṅkāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">masculine moves, masculine appearance, masculine ways, masculine desires, masculine voice, and masculine adornment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tattha rajjati tatrābhiramati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s stimulated by this and takes pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tattha rattā tatrābhiratā bahiddhā saṃyogaṃ ākaṅkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So she desires to bond with another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañcassā saṃyogapaccayā uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ tañca ākaṅkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she desires the pleasure and happiness that comes from such a bond. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthatte, bhikkhave, abhiratā sattā purisesu saṃyogaṃ gatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings who are attached to their femininity are bound to men. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, itthī itthattaṃ nātivattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a woman does not transcend her femininity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puriso, bhikkhave, ajjhattaṃ purisindriyaṃ manasi karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A man focuses on his own masculinity: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisakuttaṃ purisākappaṃ purisavidhaṃ purisacchandaṃ purisassaraṃ purisālaṅkāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his masculine moves, masculine appearance, masculine ways, masculine desires, masculine voice, and masculine adornment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha rajjati tatrābhiramati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s stimulated by this and takes pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha ratto tatrābhirato bahiddhā itthindriyaṃ manasi karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So he focuses on the femininity of others: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthikuttaṃ itthākappaṃ itthividhaṃ itthicchandaṃ itthissaraṃ itthālaṅkāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">feminine moves, feminine appearance, feminine ways, feminine desires, feminine voice, and feminine adornment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha rajjati tatrābhiramati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s stimulated by this and takes pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha ratto tatrābhirato bahiddhā saṃyogaṃ ākaṅkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So he desires to bond with another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañcassa saṃyogapaccayā uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ tañca ākaṅkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And he desires the pleasure and happiness that comes from such a bond. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purisatte, bhikkhave, abhiratā sattā itthīsu saṃyogaṃ gatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings who are attached to their masculinity are bound to women. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puriso purisattaṃ nātivattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a man does not transcend his masculinity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, saṃyogo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how one is bound. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, visaṃyogo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does one become unbound? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthī, bhikkhave, ajjhattaṃ itthindriyaṃ na manasi karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman doesn’t focus on her own femininity: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthikuttaṃ itthākappaṃ itthividhaṃ itthicchandaṃ itthissaraṃ itthālaṅkāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">her feminine moves, feminine appearance, feminine ways, feminine desires, feminine voice, and feminine adornment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tattha na rajjati, sā tatra nābhiramati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She isn’t stimulated by this and takes no pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tattha arattā tatra anabhiratā bahiddhā purisindriyaṃ na manasi karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So she doesn’t focus on the masculinity of others: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisakuttaṃ purisākappaṃ purisavidhaṃ purisacchandaṃ purisassaraṃ purisālaṅkāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">masculine moves, masculine appearance, masculine ways, masculine desires, masculine voice, and masculine adornment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tattha na rajjati, tatra nābhiramati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">She isn’t stimulated by this and takes no pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā tattha arattā tatra anabhiratā bahiddhā saṃyogaṃ nākaṅkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So she doesn’t desire to bond with another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañcassā saṃyogapaccayā uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ tañca nākaṅkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor does she desire the pleasure and happiness that comes from such a bond. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itthatte, bhikkhave, anabhiratā sattā purisesu visaṃyogaṃ gatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings who are not attached to their femininity are not bound to men. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, itthī itthattaṃ ativattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a woman transcends her femininity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puriso, bhikkhave, ajjhattaṃ purisindriyaṃ na manasi karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A man doesn’t focus on his own masculinity: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisakuttaṃ purisākappaṃ purisavidhaṃ purisacchandaṃ purisassaraṃ purisālaṅkāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">masculine moves, masculine appearance, masculine ways, masculine desires, masculine voice, and masculine adornment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha na rajjati, so tatra nābhiramati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He isn’t stimulated by this and takes no pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha aratto tatra anabhirato bahiddhā itthindriyaṃ na manasi karoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So he doesn’t focus on the femininity of others: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthikuttaṃ itthākappaṃ itthividhaṃ itthicchandaṃ itthissaraṃ itthālaṅkāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">feminine moves, feminine appearance, feminine ways, feminine desires, feminine voice, and feminine adornment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha na rajjati, tatra nābhiramati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He isn’t stimulated by this and takes no pleasure in it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha aratto tatra anabhirato bahiddhā saṃyogaṃ nākaṅkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So he doesn’t desire to bond with another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañcassa saṃyogapaccayā uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ tañca nākaṅkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor does he desire the pleasure and happiness that comes from such a bond. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purisatte, bhikkhave, anabhiratā sattā itthīsu visaṃyogaṃ gatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sentient beings who are not attached to their masculinity are not bound to women. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, puriso purisattaṃ ativattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a man transcends his masculinity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, visaṃyogo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how one is unbound. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhave, saṃyogo visaṃyogo dhammapariyāyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the exposition of the teaching on the bound and the unbound.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
