<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.029-29. Dutiyaparihānisutta  - 29. Non-decline for a Lay Follower </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.029. 29. Dutiyaparihānisutta  - 29. Non-decline for a Lay Follower </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Vajjisattakavagga  - 3. The Vajji Seven </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, bhikkhave, dhammā upāsakassa parihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These seven things lead to the decline of a lay follower. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhudassanaṃ hāpeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They stop seeing the mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammassavanaṃ pamajjati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They neglect listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhisīle na sikkhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t train in higher ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appasādabahulo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very suspicious about mendicants, whether senior, junior, or middle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūsu theresu ceva navesu ca majjhimesu ca upārambhacitto dhammaṃ suṇāti randhagavesī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ito bahiddhā dakkhiṇeyyaṃ gavesati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of religious donations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha ca pubbakāraṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they serve them first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta dhammā upāsakassa parihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven things lead to the decline of a lay follower. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattime, bhikkhave, dhammā upāsakassa aparihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven things don’t lead to the decline of a lay follower. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhudassanaṃ na hāpeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t stop seeing the mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammassavanaṃ nappamajjati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t neglect listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhisīle sikkhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They train in higher ethical conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasādabahulo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re very confident about mendicants, whether senior, junior, or middle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūsu theresu ceva navesu ca majjhimesu ca anupārambhacitto dhammaṃ suṇāti na randhagavesī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ito bahiddhā dakkhiṇeyyaṃ gavesati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of religious donations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idha ca pubbakāraṃ karoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they serve the Buddhist community first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta dhammā upāsakassa aparihānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven things don’t lead to the decline of a lay follower.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato athāparaṃ etadavoca satthā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dassanaṃ bhāvitattānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A lay follower stops seeing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hāpeti upāsako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who have developed themselves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Savanañca ariyadhammānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and listening to the teaching of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhisīle na sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t train in higher ethical conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appasādo ca bhikkhūsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their suspicion about mendicants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhiyyo bhiyyo pavaḍḍhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">just grows and grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upārambhakacitto ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They want to listen to the true teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammaṃ sotumicchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with a fault-finding mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ito ca bahiddhā aññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They seek outside the Buddhist community </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dakkhiṇeyyaṃ gavesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for someone else worthy of religious donations, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattheva ca pubbakāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that lay follower </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo karoti upāsako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">serves them first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete kho parihāniye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven principles leading to decline </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satta dhamme sudesite; </span></p>
<p class="p3">have been well taught. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsako sevamāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lay follower who practices them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammā parihāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">falls away from the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanaṃ bhāvitattānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lay follower doesn’t stop seeing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo na hāpeti upāsako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who have developed themselves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Savanañca ariyadhammānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and listening to the teaching of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhisīle ca sikkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They train in higher ethical conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasādo cassa bhikkhūsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and their confidence in mendicants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhiyyo bhiyyo pavaḍḍhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">just grows and grows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupārambhacitto ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They want to listen to the true teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammaṃ sotumicchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">without a fault-finding mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ito bahiddhā aññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t seek outside the Buddhist community </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dakkhiṇeyyaṃ gavesati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for someone else worthy of religious donations, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idheva ca pubbakāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that lay follower </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo karoti upāsako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">serves the Buddhist community first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ete kho aparihāniye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven principles that prevent decline </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satta dhamme sudesite; </span></p>
<p class="p3">have been well taught. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsako sevamāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lay follower who practices them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhammā na parihāyatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">doesn’t fall away from the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
