<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.067-67. Nagaropamasutta  - 67. The Simile of the Citadel </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.067. 67. Nagaropamasutta  - 67. The Simile of the Citadel </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Mahāvagga  - 7. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, bhikkhave, rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ sattahi nagaraparikkhārehi suparikkhataṃ hoti, catunnañca āhārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a king’s frontier citadel is well provided with seven essentials and gets four kinds of sustenance when needed, without trouble or difficulty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ akaraṇīyaṃ bāhirehi paccatthikehi paccāmittehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it is then called a king’s frontier citadel that cannot be overrun by external foes and enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi nagaraparikkhārehi suparikkhataṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">With what seven essentials is a citadel well provided? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare esikā hoti gambhīranemā sunikhātā acalā asampavedhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a citadel has a pillar with deep foundations, firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā paṭhamena nagaraparikkhārena suparikkhataṃ hoti rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first essential with which a king’s frontier citadel is well provided, to defend those within and repel those outside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare parikkhā hoti gambhīrā ceva vitthatā ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a citadel has a moat that is deep and wide. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā dutiyena nagaraparikkhārena suparikkhataṃ hoti rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second essential … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare anupariyāyapatho hoti ucco ceva vitthato ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a citadel has a patrol path that is high and wide. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā tatiyena nagaraparikkhārena suparikkhataṃ hoti rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third essential … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ āvudhaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti salākañceva jevanikañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a citadel has stores of many weapons, both projectile and hand-held. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā catutthena nagaraparikkhārena suparikkhataṃ hoti rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth essential … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahubalakāyo paṭivasati, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, many kinds of armed forces reside in a citadel, such as </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthārohā assārohā rathikā dhanuggahā celakā calakā piṇḍadāyakā uggā rājaputtā pakkhandino mahānāgā sūrā cammayodhino dāsakaputtā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">elephant riders, cavalry, charioteers, archers, bannermen, adjutants, food servers, warrior-chiefs, princes, chargers, great warriors, heroes, leather-clad soldiers, and sons of bondservants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā pañcamena nagaraparikkhārena suparikkhataṃ hoti rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth essential … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare dovāriko hoti paṇḍito byatto medhāvī aññātānaṃ nivāretā ñātānaṃ pavesetā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a citadel has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and intelligent. He keeps strangers out and lets known people in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā chaṭṭhena nagaraparikkhārena suparikkhataṃ hoti rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the sixth essential … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare pākāro hoti ucco ceva vitthato ca vāsanalepanasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a citadel has a wall that’s high and wide, covered with plaster. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā sattamena nagaraparikkhārena suparikkhataṃ hoti rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh essential with which a king’s frontier citadel is well provided, to defend those within and repel those outside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi sattahi nagaraparikkhārehi suparikkhataṃ hoti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">With these seven essentials a citadel is well provided. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ āhārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the four kinds of sustenance it gets when needed, without trouble or difficulty? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ tiṇakaṭṭhodakaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti abbhantarānaṃ ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a king’s frontier citadel has much hay, wood, and water stored up for the enjoyment, relief, and comfort of those within and to repel those outside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ sāliyavakaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti abbhantarānaṃ ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a king’s frontier citadel has much rice and barley stored up for those within. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ tilamuggamāsāparaṇṇaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti abbhantarānaṃ ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a king’s frontier citadel has much food such as sesame, green gram, and black gram stored up for those within. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ bhesajjaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a king’s frontier citadel has much medicine—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappi navanītaṃ telaṃ madhu phāṇitaṃ loṇaṃ abbhantarānaṃ ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">ghee, butter, oil, honey, molasses, and salt—stored up for the enjoyment, relief, and comfort of those within and to repel those outside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ āhārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of sustenance it gets when needed, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ imehi sattahi nagaraparikkhārehi suparikkhataṃ hoti, imesañca catunnaṃ āhārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a king’s frontier citadel is well provided with seven essentials and gets four kinds of sustenance when needed, without trouble or difficulty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, rañño paccantimaṃ nagaraṃ akaraṇīyaṃ bāhirehi paccatthikehi paccāmittehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it is then called a king’s frontier citadel that cannot be overrun by external foes and enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yato ariyasāvako sattahi saddhammehi samannāgato hoti, catunnañca jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when a noble disciple has seven good qualities, and they get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako akaraṇīyo mārassa akaraṇīyo pāpimato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they are then called a noble disciple who cannot be overrun by Māra, who cannot be overrun by the Wicked One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi saddhammehi samannāgato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the seven good qualities that they have? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare esikā hoti gambhīranemā sunikhātā acalā asampavedhī abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a king’s frontier citadel has a pillar with deep foundations, firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable, to defend those within and repel those outside, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako saddho hoti, saddahati tathāgatassa bodhiṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so … pe … buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhesiko, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako akusalaṃ pajahati, kusalaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with faith as their pillar gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvajjaṃ pajahati, anavajjaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhaṃ attānaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they keep themselves pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā paṭhamena saddhammena samannāgato hoti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first good quality they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare parikkhā hoti gambhīrā ceva vitthatā ca abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a citadel has a moat that is deep and wide, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako hirīmā hoti, hirīyati kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena, hirīyati pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way a noble disciple has a conscience. They’re conscientious about bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad, unskillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hirīparikkho kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako akusalaṃ pajahati, kusalaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with a conscience as their moat gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvajjaṃ pajahati, anavajjaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhaṃ attānaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they keep themselves pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā dutiyena saddhammena samannāgato hoti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second good quality they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare anupariyāyapatho hoti ucco ceva vitthato ca abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a citadel has a patrol path that is high and wide, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ, kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ottappī hoti, ottappati kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena, ottappati pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way a noble disciple is prudent. They’re prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to acquiring any bad, unskillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ottappapariyāyapatho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako akusalaṃ pajahati, kusalaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with prudence as their patrol path gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvajjaṃ pajahati, anavajjaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhaṃ attānaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they keep themselves pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā tatiyena saddhammena samannāgato hoti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third good quality they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ āvudhaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti salākañceva jevanikañca abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a citadel has stores of many weapons, both projectile and hand-held, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako bahussuto hoti … pe … diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way a noble disciple is very learned. They remember and keep what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutāvudho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako akusalaṃ pajahati, kusalaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with learning as their weapon gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvajjaṃ pajahati, anavajjaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhaṃ attānaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they keep themselves pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā catutthena saddhammena samannāgato hoti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth good quality they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahubalakāyo paṭivasati, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as many kinds of armed forces reside in a citadel … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthārohā assārohā rathikā dhanuggahā celakā calakā piṇḍadāyakā uggā rājaputtā pakkhandino mahānāgā sūrā cammayodhino dāsakaputtā abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya, thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way a noble disciple is energetic. They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vīriyabalakāyo, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako akusalaṃ pajahati, kusalaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with energy as their armed forces gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvajjaṃ pajahati, anavajjaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhaṃ attānaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they keep themselves pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā pañcamena saddhammena samannāgato hoti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth good quality they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare dovāriko hoti paṇḍito byatto medhāvī aññātānaṃ nivāretā ñātānaṃ pavesetā abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a citadel has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and intelligent, who keeps strangers out and lets known people in, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako satimā hoti paramena satinepakkena samannāgato cirakatampi cirabhāsitampi saritā anussaritā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way a noble disciple is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satidovāriko, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako akusalaṃ pajahati, kusalaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with mindfulness as their gatekeeper gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvajjaṃ pajahati, anavajjaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhaṃ attānaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they keep themselves pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā chaṭṭhena saddhammena samannāgato hoti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the sixth good quality they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare pākāro hoti ucco ceva vitthato ca vāsanalepanasampanno ca abbhantarānaṃ guttiyā bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a citadel has a wall that’s high and wide, covered with plaster, to defend those within and repel those outside, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññāvāsanalepanasampanno, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako akusalaṃ pajahati, kusalaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple with wisdom as their wall gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvajjaṃ pajahati, anavajjaṃ bhāveti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhaṃ attānaṃ pariharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they keep themselves pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā sattamena saddhammena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh good quality they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi sattahi saddhammehi samannāgato hoti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven good qualities that they have. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—that they get when they want, without trouble or difficulty? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ tiṇakaṭṭhodakaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti abbhantarānaṃ ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a king’s frontier citadel has much hay, wood, and water stored up for the enjoyment, relief, and comfort of those within and to repel those outside, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako vivicceva kāmehi … pe … paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way a noble disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya okkamanāya nibbānassa. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is for their own enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ sāliyavakaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti abbhantarānaṃ ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a king’s frontier citadel has much rice and barley stored up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā … pe … dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a noble disciple enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya okkamanāya nibbānassa. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is for their own enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ tilamuggamāsāparaṇṇaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti abbhantarānaṃ ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a king’s frontier citadel has much food such as sesame, green gram, and black gram stored up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako pītiyā ca virāgā … pe … tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way with the fading away of rapture, a noble disciple enters and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya okkamanāya nibbānassa. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is for their own enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño paccantime nagare bahuṃ bhesajjaṃ sannicitaṃ hoti, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just as a king’s frontier citadel has much medicine—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappi navanītaṃ telaṃ madhu phāṇitaṃ loṇaṃ abbhantarānaṃ ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya bāhirānaṃ paṭighātāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">ghee, butter, oil, honey, molasses, and salt—stored up for the enjoyment, relief, and comfort of those within and to repel those outside, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the same way, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, a noble disciple enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano ratiyā aparitassāya phāsuvihārāya okkamanāya nibbānassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is for their own enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—which they get when they want, without trouble or difficulty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako imehi sattahi saddhammehi samannāgato hoti, imesañca catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has seven good qualities, and they get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako akaraṇīyo mārassa akaraṇīyo pāpimato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they are then called a noble disciple who cannot be overrun by Māra, who cannot be overrun by the Wicked One.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
