<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.026-26. Bojjhaṅgasutta  - 26. Awakening Factors </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.026. 26. Bojjhaṅgasutta  - 26. Awakening Factors </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Vajjisattakavagga  - 3. The Vajji Seven </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satta vo, bhikkhave, aparihāniye dhamme desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you seven principles that prevent decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katame ca, bhikkhave, satta aparihāniyā dhammā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the seven principles that prevent decline? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhū satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvessanti; vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the mendicants develop the awakening factor of mindfulness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhū dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvessanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">investigation of principles … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyasambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvessanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvessanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">rapture … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passaddhisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvessanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">tranquility … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samādhisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvessanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">immersion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāvessanti; vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">equanimity, they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, ime satta aparihāniyā dhammā bhikkhūsu ṭhassanti, imesu ca sattasu aparihāniyesu dhammesu bhikkhū sandississanti; vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they can expect growth, not decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
