<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.041-41. Dutiyavasasutta  - 41. Mastery of the Mind (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.041. 41. Dutiyavasasutta  - 41. Mastery of the Mind (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato sāriputto cittaṃ vase vatteti, no ca sāriputto cittassa vasena vattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, having seven qualities Sāriputta has mastered his mind and is not mastered by it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, sāriputto samādhikusalo hoti, samādhissa samāpattikusalo, samādhissa ṭhitikusalo, samādhissa vuṭṭhānakusalo, samādhissa kalyāṇakusalo, samādhissa gocarakusalo, samādhissa abhinīhārakusalo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sāriputta is skilled at immersion, skilled in entering immersion, skilled in remaining in immersion, skilled in emerging from immersion, skilled in gladdening the mind for immersion, skilled in the mindfulness meditation subjects for immersion, and skilled in projecting the mind purified by immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato sāriputto cittaṃ vase vatteti, no ca sāriputto cittassa vasena vattatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having these seven qualities Sāriputta has mastered his mind and is not mastered by it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
