<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.083-83. Satthusāsanasutta  - 83. The Teacher’s Instructions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.083. 83. Satthusāsanasutta  - 83. The Teacher’s Instructions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Vinayavagga  - 8. The Monastic Law </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upāli yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā upāli bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṃ desetu, yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye kho tvaṃ, upāli, dhamme jāneyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Upāli, you might know that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ime dhammā na ekantanibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattantī’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">certain things don’t lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃsena, upāli, dhāreyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should definitely bear in mind that such things are </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘neso dhammo neso vinayo netaṃ satthusāsanan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not the teaching, not the training, and not the Teacher’s instructions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho tvaṃ, upāli, dhamme jāneyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You might know that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ime dhammā ekantanibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattantī’ti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">certain things do lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃsena, upāli, dhāreyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should definitely bear in mind that such things are </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘eso dhammo eso vinayo etaṃ satthusāsanan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching, the training, and the Teacher’s instructions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
