<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.059-59. Kimilasutta  - 59. With Kimbila </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.059. 59. Kimilasutta  - 59. With Kimbila </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Abyākatavagga  - 6. The Undeclared Points </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kimilāyaṃ viharati niculavane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Kimbilā in the Freshwater Mangrove Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā kimilo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā kimilo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Kimbila went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo na ciraṭṭhitiko hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does not last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, kimila, tathāgate parinibbute bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upāsakā upāsikāyo satthari agāravā viharanti appatissā, dhamme agāravā viharanti appatissā, saṅghe agāravā viharanti appatissā, sikkhāya agāravā viharanti appatissā, samādhismiṃ agāravā viharanti appatissā, appamāde agāravā viharanti appatissā, paṭisanthāre agāravā viharanti appatissā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kimbila, it’s when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen lack respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, immersion, diligence, and hospitality after the final extinguishment of the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, kimila, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo na ciraṭṭhitiko hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why the true teaching does not last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko pana, bhante, hetu ko paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo ciraṭṭhitiko hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, kimila, tathāgate parinibbute bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upāsakā upāsikāyo satthari sagāravā viharanti sappatissā, dhamme sagāravā viharanti sappatissā, saṅghe sagāravā viharanti sappatissā, sikkhāya sagāravā viharanti sappatissā, samādhismiṃ sagāravā viharanti sappatissā, appamāde sagāravā viharanti sappatissā, paṭisanthāre sagāravā viharanti sappatissā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kimbila, it’s when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen maintain respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, immersion, diligence, and hospitality after the final extinguishment of the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, kimila, hetu ayaṃ paccayo yena tathāgate parinibbute saddhammo ciraṭṭhitiko hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the cause, this is the reason why the true teaching does last long after the final extinguishment of the Realized One.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
