<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.027-27. Saññāsutta  - 27. Perceptions </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.027. 27. Saññāsutta  - 27. Perceptions </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Vajjisattakavagga  - 3. The Vajji Seven </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satta vo, bhikkhave, aparihāniye dhamme desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you seven principles that prevent decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, satta aparihāniyā dhammā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the seven principles that prevent decline? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhū aniccasaññaṃ bhāvessanti; vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the mendicants develop the perception of impermanence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhū anattasaññaṃ bhāvessanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">not-self … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asubhasaññaṃ bhāvessanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">ugliness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādīnavasaññaṃ bhāvessanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">drawbacks … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pahānasaññaṃ bhāvessanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">giving up … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">virāgasaññaṃ bhāvessanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">fading away … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirodhasaññaṃ bhāvessanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">cessation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, ime satta aparihāniyā dhammā bhikkhūsu ṭhassanti, imesu ca sattasu aparihāniyesu dhammesu, bhikkhū sandississanti; vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they can expect growth, not decline. As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they can expect growth, not decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
