<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.007-7. Uggasutta  - 7. With Ugga </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.007. 7. Uggasutta  - 7. With Ugga </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Dhanavagga  - 1. Wealth </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uggo rājamahāmatto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho uggo rājamahāmatto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Ugga the government minister went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva aḍḍho cāyaṃ, bhante, migāro rohaṇeyyo yāva mahaddhano yāva mahābhogo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Migāra of Rohaṇa is so rich, so very wealthy.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kīva aḍḍho panugga, migāro rohaṇeyyo, kīva mahaddhano, kīva mahābhogo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Ugga, how rich is he?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sataṃ, bhante, satasahassānaṃ hiraññassa, ko pana vādo rūpiyassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He has a hundred thousand gold coins, not to mention the silver!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi kho etaṃ, ugga, dhanaṃ netaṃ ‘natthī’ti vadāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, Ugga, that is wealth, I can’t deny it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañca kho etaṃ, ugga, dhanaṃ sādhāraṇaṃ agginā udakena rājūhi corehi appiyehi dāyādehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But fire, water, rulers, thieves, and unloved heirs all take a share of that wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satta kho imāni, ugga, dhanāni asādhāraṇāni agginā udakena rājūhi corehi appiyehi dāyādehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these seven kinds of wealth that they can’t take a share of. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhādhanaṃ, sīladhanaṃ, hirīdhanaṃ, ottappadhanaṃ, sutadhanaṃ, cāgadhanaṃ, paññādhanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The wealth of faith, ethical conduct, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, ugga, satta dhanāni asādhāraṇāni agginā udakena rājūhi corehi appiyehi dāyādehīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these seven kinds of wealth that fire, water, rulers, thieves, and unloved heirs can’t take a share of. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhādhanaṃ sīladhanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Faith and ethical conduct are kinds of wealth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hirī ottappiyaṃ dhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as are conscience and prudence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutadhanañca cāgo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">learning and generosity, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññā ve sattamaṃ dhanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and wisdom is the seventh kind of wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa ete dhanā atthi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a woman or man </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthiyā purisassa vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">has these kinds of wealth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve mahaddhano loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re really rich in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajeyyo devamānuse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">invincible among gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā saddhañca sīlañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So let the wise devote themselves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasādaṃ dhammadassanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to faith, ethical behavior, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyuñjetha medhāvī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">confidence, and insight into the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saraṃ buddhāna sāsanan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
