<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.002-2. Dutiyapiyasutta  - 2. Pleasing (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.002. 2. Dutiyapiyasutta  - 2. Pleasing (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Dhanavagga  - 1. Wealth </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is disliked and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu lābhakāmo ca hoti, sakkārakāmo ca hoti, anavaññattikāmo ca hoti, ahiriko ca hoti, anottappī ca, issukī ca, maccharī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant desires material possessions, honor, and to be looked up to. They lack conscience and prudence. They’re jealous and stingy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these seven qualities is disliked and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with seven qualities is liked and approved by their spiritual companions, respected and admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na lābhakāmo ca hoti, na sakkārakāmo ca hoti, na anavaññattikāmo ca hoti, hirīmā ca hoti, ottappī ca, anissukī ca, amaccharī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t desire material possessions, honor, and to be looked up to. They have conscience and prudence. They’re not jealous or stingy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these seven qualities is liked and approved by their spiritual companions, respected and admired.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
