<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.047-47. Dutiyaaggisutta  - 47. Fires (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.047. 47. Dutiyaaggisutta  - 47. Fires (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Mahāyaññavagga  - 5. A Great Sacrifice </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena uggatasarīrassa brāhmaṇassa mahāyañño upakkhaṭo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the brahmin Uggatasarīra had prepared a large sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañca usabhasatāni thūṇūpanītāni honti yaññatthāya, pañca vacchatarasatāni thūṇūpanītāni honti yaññatthāya, pañca vacchatarisatāni thūṇūpanītāni honti yaññatthāya, pañca ajasatāni thūṇūpanītāni honti yaññatthāya, pañca urabbhasatāni thūṇūpanītāni honti yaññatthāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats and rams—five hundred of each—had been led to the post for the sacrifice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uggatasarīro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Uggatasarīra went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho uggatasarīro brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sutaṃ metaṃ, bho gotama, aggissa ādānaṃ yūpassa ussāpanaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti mahānisaṃsan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, I have heard that kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post is very fruitful and beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayāpi kho etaṃ, brāhmaṇa, sutaṃ aggissa ādānaṃ yūpassa ussāpanaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti mahānisaṃsan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve also heard this, brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho uggatasarīro brāhmaṇo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho uggatasarīro brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and third time Uggatasarīra said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bho gotama, aggissa ādānaṃ yūpassa ussāpanaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti mahānisaṃsan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, I have heard that kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post is very fruitful and beneficial.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayāpi kho etaṃ, brāhmaṇa, sutaṃ aggissa ādānaṃ yūpassa ussāpanaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti mahānisaṃsan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve also heard this, brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayidaṃ, bho gotama, sameti bhoto ceva gotamassa amhākañca, yadidaṃ sabbena sabbaṃ”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then Master Gotama and I are in total agreement in this matter.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte āyasmā ānando uggatasarīraṃ brāhmaṇaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to Uggatasarīra, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kho, brāhmaṇa, tathāgatā evaṃ pucchitabbā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, you shouldn’t ask the Buddha in this way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sutaṃ metaṃ, bho gotama, aggissa ādānaṃ yūpassa ussāpanaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti mahānisaṃsan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, tathāgatā pucchitabbā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should ask in this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahañhi, bhante, aggiṃ ādātukāmo, yūpaṃ ussāpetukāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, I want to kindle the sacrificial fire and raise the sacrificial post. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovadatu maṃ, bhante, bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Buddha please advise </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusāsatu maṃ, bhante, bhagavā yaṃ mama assa dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and instruct me. It will be for my lasting welfare and happiness.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho uggatasarīro brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Uggatasarīra said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahañhi, bho gotama, aggiṃ ādātukāmo yūpaṃ ussāpetukāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I want to kindle the sacrificial fire and raise the sacrificial post. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovadatu maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May Master Gotama please advise </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anusāsatu maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo yaṃ mama assa dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and instruct me. It will be for my lasting welfare and happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aggiṃ, brāhmaṇa, ādento yūpaṃ ussāpento pubbeva yaññā tīṇi satthāni ussāpeti akusalāni dukkhudrayāni dukkhavipākāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, one raises three unskillful knives which ripen and result in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasatthaṃ, vacīsatthaṃ, manosatthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The knives of the body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggiṃ, brāhmaṇa, ādento yūpaṃ ussāpento pubbeva yaññā evaṃ cittaṃ uppādesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post one gives rise to the thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakā usabhā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā vacchatarā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā vacchatariyo haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā ajā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā urabbhā haññantu yaññatthāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May this many bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats, and rams be slaughtered for the sacrifice!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘puññaṃ karomī’ti apuññaṃ karoti, ‘kusalaṃ karomī’ti akusalaṃ karoti, ‘sugatiyā maggaṃ pariyesāmī’ti duggatiyā maggaṃ pariyesati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking, ‘May I make merit’, one makes bad karma. Thinking, ‘May I do good’, one does bad. Thinking, ‘May I seek the path to a good rebirth’, one seeks the path to a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggiṃ, brāhmaṇa, ādento yūpaṃ ussāpento pubbeva yaññā idaṃ paṭhamaṃ manosatthaṃ ussāpeti akusalaṃ dukkhudrayaṃ dukkhavipākaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post one raises this first unskillful mental knife which ripens and results in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, brāhmaṇa, aggiṃ ādento yūpaṃ ussāpento pubbeva yaññā evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, one says such things as: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ettakā usabhā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā vacchatarā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā vacchatariyo haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā ajā haññantu yaññatthāya, ettakā urabbhā haññantu yaññatthāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May this many bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats, and rams be slaughtered for the sacrifice!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘puññaṃ karomī’ti apuññaṃ karoti, ‘kusalaṃ karomī’ti akusalaṃ karoti, ‘sugatiyā maggaṃ pariyesāmī’ti duggatiyā maggaṃ pariyesati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking, ‘May I make merit’, one makes bad karma. Thinking, ‘May I do good’, one does bad. Thinking, ‘May I seek the path to a good rebirth’, one seeks the path to a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggiṃ, brāhmaṇa, ādento yūpaṃ ussāpento pubbeva yaññā idaṃ dutiyaṃ vacīsatthaṃ ussāpeti akusalaṃ dukkhudrayaṃ dukkhavipākaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post one raises this second unskillful verbal knife which ripens and results in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, brāhmaṇa, aggiṃ ādento yūpaṃ ussāpento pubbeva yaññā sayaṃ paṭhamaṃ samārambhati usabhā hantuṃ yaññatthāya, sayaṃ paṭhamaṃ samārambhati vacchatarā hantuṃ yaññatthāya, sayaṃ paṭhamaṃ samārambhati vacchatariyo hantuṃ yaññatthāya, sayaṃ paṭhamaṃ samārambhati ajā hantuṃ yaññatthāya, sayaṃ paṭhamaṃ samārambhati urabbhā hantuṃ yaññatthāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post one first personally undertakes preparations for the sacrificial slaughter of bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats, and rams. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘puññaṃ karomī’ti apuññaṃ karoti, ‘kusalaṃ karomī’ti akusalaṃ karoti, ‘sugatiyā maggaṃ pariyesāmī’ti duggatiyā maggaṃ pariyesati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking, ‘May I make merit’, one makes bad karma. Thinking, ‘May I do good’, one does bad. Thinking, ‘May I seek the path to a good rebirth’, one seeks the path to a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggiṃ, brāhmaṇa, ādento yūpaṃ ussāpento pubbeva yaññā idaṃ tatiyaṃ kāyasatthaṃ ussāpeti akusalaṃ dukkhudrayaṃ dukkhavipākaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, one raises this third unskillful bodily knife which ripens and results in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggiṃ, brāhmaṇa, ādento yūpaṃ ussāpento pubbeva yaññā imāni tīṇi satthāni ussāpeti akusalāni dukkhudrayāni dukkhavipākāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, one raises these three unskillful knives which ripen and result in suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayome, brāhmaṇa, aggī pahātabbā parivajjetabbā, na sevitabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Brahmin, these three fires should be given up and rejected, not cultivated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgaggi, dosaggi, mohaggi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fires of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā cāyaṃ, brāhmaṇa, rāgaggi pahātabbo parivajjetabbo, na sevitabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why should the fire of greed be given up and rejected, not cultivated? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratto kho, brāhmaṇa, rāgena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya duccaritaṃ caritvā, manasā duccaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmāyaṃ rāgaggi pahātabbo parivajjetabbo, na sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the fire of greed should be given up and rejected, not cultivated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā cāyaṃ, brāhmaṇa, dosaggi pahātabbo parivajjetabbo, na sevitabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why should the fire of hate be given up and rejected, not cultivated? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭho kho, brāhmaṇa, dosena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A hateful person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya duccaritaṃ caritvā, manasā duccaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmāyaṃ dosaggi pahātabbo parivajjetabbo, na sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the fire of hate should be given up and rejected, not cultivated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kasmā cāyaṃ, brāhmaṇa, mohaggi pahātabbo parivajjetabbo, na sevitabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And why should the fire of delusion be given up and rejected, not cultivated? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mūḷho kho, brāhmaṇa, mohena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya duccaritaṃ caritvā, manasā duccaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmāyaṃ mohaggi pahātabbo parivajjetabbo, na sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the fire of delusion should be given up and rejected, not cultivated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho tayo, brāhmaṇa, aggī pahātabbā parivajjetabbā, na sevitabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These three fires should be given up and rejected, not cultivated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayo kho, brāhmaṇa, aggī sakkatvā garuṃ katvā mānetvā pūjetvā sammā sukhaṃ parihātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Brahmin, you should properly and happily take care of three fires, honoring, respecting, esteeming, and venerating them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhuneyyaggi, gahapataggi, dakkhiṇeyyaggi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The fire of those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods. The fire of a householder. And the fire of those worthy of a religious donation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, brāhmaṇa, āhuneyyaggi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fire of those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, brāhmaṇa, yassa te honti mātāti vā pitāti vā, ayaṃ vuccati, brāhmaṇa, āhuneyyaggi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your mother and father are called the fire of those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atohayaṃ, brāhmaṇa, āhuto sambhūto, tasmāyaṃ āhuneyyaggi sakkatvā garuṃ katvā mānetvā pūjetvā sammā sukhaṃ parihātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since it is from them that you’ve been incubated and produced. So you should properly and happily take care of this fire, honoring, respecting, esteeming, and venerating it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, brāhmaṇa, gahapataggi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fire of a householder? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, brāhmaṇa, yassa te honti puttāti vā dārāti vā dāsāti vā pessāti vā kammakarāti vā, ayaṃ vuccati, brāhmaṇa, gahapataggi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Your children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff are called a householder’s fire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmāyaṃ gahapataggi sakkatvā garuṃ katvā mānetvā pūjetvā sammā sukhaṃ parihātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should properly and happily take care of this fire, honoring, respecting, esteeming, and venerating it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, brāhmaṇa, dakkhiṇeyyaggi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the fire of those worthy of a religious donation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, brāhmaṇa, ye te samaṇabrāhmaṇā parappavādā paṭiviratā khantisoracce niviṭṭhā ekamattānaṃ damenti, ekamattānaṃ samenti, ekamattānaṃ parinibbāpenti, ayaṃ vuccati, brāhmaṇa, dakkhiṇeyyaggi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The ascetics and brahmins who avoid intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and gentleness, and who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves are called the fire of those worthy of a religious donation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmāyaṃ dakkhiṇeyyaggi sakkatvā garuṃ katvā mānetvā pūjetvā sammā sukhaṃ parihātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should properly and happily take care of this fire, honoring, respecting, esteeming, and venerating it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, brāhmaṇa, tayo aggī sakkatvā garuṃ katvā mānetvā pūjetvā sammā sukhaṃ parihātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should properly and happily take care of these three fires, honoring, respecting, esteeming, and venerating them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho pana, brāhmaṇa, kaṭṭhaggi kālena kālaṃ ujjaletabbo, kālena kālaṃ ajjhupekkhitabbo, kālena kālaṃ nibbāpetabbo, kālena kālaṃ nikkhipitabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the wood fire, brahmin, should, from time to time, be fanned, watched over with equanimity, extinguished, or put aside.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, uggatasarīro brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the brahmin Uggatasarīra said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ, bho gotama, pañca usabhasatāni muñcāmi jīvitaṃ demi, pañca vacchatarasatāni muñcāmi jīvitaṃ demi, pañca vacchatarisatāni muñcāmi jīvitaṃ demi, pañca ajasatāni muñcāmi jīvitaṃ demi, pañca urabbhasatāni muñcāmi jīvitaṃ demi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Master Gotama, I now set free these five hundred bulls, five hundred bullocks, five hundred heifers, five hundred goats, and five hundred rams. I give them life! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Haritāni ceva tiṇāni khādantu, sītāni ca pānīyāni pivantu, sīto ca nesaṃ vāto upavāyatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May they eat grass and drink cool water and enjoy a cool breeze!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
