<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.064-64. Kodhanasutta  - 64. Irritable </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.064. 64. Kodhanasutta  - 64. Irritable </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Abyākatavagga  - 6. The Undeclared Points </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, bhikkhave, dhammā sapattakantā sapattakaraṇā kodhanaṃ āgacchanti itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these seven things that please and assist an enemy happen to an irritable woman or man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa evaṃ icchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, an enemy wishes for an enemy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāyaṃ dubbaṇṇo assā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only they’d become ugly!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa vaṇṇavatāya nandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because an enemy doesn’t like to have a beautiful enemy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhanoyaṃ, bhikkhave, purisapuggalo kodhābhibhūto kodhapareto, kiñcāpi so hoti sunhāto suvilitto kappitakesamassu odātavatthavasano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An irritable person, overcome and overwhelmed by anger, is ugly, even though they’re nicely bathed and anointed, with hair and beard dressed, and wearing white clothes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho so dubbaṇṇova hoti kodhābhibhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo dhammo sapattakanto sapattakaraṇo kodhanaṃ āgacchati itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first thing that pleases and assists an enemy which happens to an irritable woman or man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa evaṃ icchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāyaṃ dukkhaṃ sayeyyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only they’d sleep badly!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa sukhaseyyāya nandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because an enemy doesn’t like to have an enemy who sleeps well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhanoyaṃ, bhikkhave, purisapuggalo kodhābhibhūto kodhapareto, kiñcāpi so pallaṅke seti gonakatthate paṭalikatthate kadalimigapavarapaccattharaṇe sauttaracchade ubhatolohitakūpadhāne; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An irritable person, overcome and overwhelmed by anger, sleeps badly, even though they sleep on a couch spread with woolen covers—shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers—and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red pillows at both ends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho so dukkhaññeva seti kodhābhibhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, dutiyo dhammo sapattakanto sapattakaraṇo kodhanaṃ āgacchati itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa evaṃ icchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāyaṃ na pacurattho assā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only they don’t get all they need!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa pacuratthatāya nandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because an enemy doesn’t like to have an enemy who gets all they need. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhanoyaṃ, bhikkhave, purisapuggalo kodhābhibhūto kodhapareto, anatthampi gahetvā ‘attho me gahito’ti maññati, atthampi gahetvā ‘anattho me gahito’ti maññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an irritable person, overcome and overwhelmed by anger, gets what they don’t need they think ‘I’ve got what I need!’ When they get what they need they think ‘I’ve got what I don’t need.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassime dhammā aññamaññaṃ vipaccanīkā gahitā dīgharattaṃ ahitāya dukkhāya saṃvattanti kodhābhibhūtassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an angry person gets these things that are the exact opposite of what they need, it’s for their lasting harm and suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, tatiyo dhammo sapattakanto sapattakaraṇo kodhanaṃ āgacchati itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa evaṃ icchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāyaṃ na bhogavā assā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only they weren’t wealthy!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa bhogavatāya nandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because an enemy doesn’t like to have an enemy who is wealthy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhanassa, bhikkhave, purisapuggalassa kodhābhibhūtassa kodhaparetassa, yepissa te honti bhogā uṭṭhānavīriyādhigatā bāhābalaparicitā sedāvakkhittā dhammikā dhammaladdhā, tepi rājāno rājakosaṃ pavesenti kodhābhibhūtassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is irritable, overcome and overwhelmed by anger, the rulers seize the legitimate wealth they’ve earned by their efforts, built up with their own hands, gathered by the sweat of their brow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho dhammo sapattakanto sapattakaraṇo kodhanaṃ āgacchati itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa evaṃ icchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāyaṃ na yasavā assā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only they weren’t famous!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa yasavatāya nandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because an enemy doesn’t like to have a famous enemy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhanoyaṃ, bhikkhave, purisapuggalo kodhābhibhūto kodhapareto, yopissa so hoti yaso appamādādhigato, tamhāpi dhaṃsati kodhābhibhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is irritable, overcome and overwhelmed by anger, any fame they have acquired by diligence falls to dust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, pañcamo dhammo sapattakanto sapattakaraṇo kodhanaṃ āgacchati itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa evaṃ icchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāyaṃ na mittavā assā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only they had no friends!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa mittavatāya nandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because an enemy doesn’t like to have an enemy with friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhanaṃ, bhikkhave, purisapuggalaṃ kodhābhibhūtaṃ kodhaparetaṃ, yepissa te honti mittāmaccā ñātisālohitā, tepi ārakā parivajjanti kodhābhibhūtaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is irritable, overcome and overwhelmed by anger, their friends and colleagues, relatives and kin avoid them from afar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, chaṭṭho dhammo sapattakanto sapattakaraṇo kodhanaṃ āgacchati itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the sixth thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa evaṃ icchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aho vatāyaṃ kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjeyyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If only, when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, sapatto sapattassa sugatigamane nandati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because an enemy doesn’t like to have an enemy who goes to a good place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhanoyaṃ, bhikkhave, purisapuggalo kodhābhibhūto kodhapareto kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is irritable, overcome and overwhelmed by anger, they do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā vācāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati kodhābhibhūto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sattamo dhammo sapattakanto sapattakaraṇo kodhanaṃ āgacchati itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh thing that pleases and assists an enemy which happens to an irritable woman or man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta dhammā sapattakantā sapattakaraṇā kodhanaṃ āgacchanti itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the seven things that please and assist an enemy which happen to an irritable woman or man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhano dubbaṇṇo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An irritable person is ugly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho dukkhampi seti so; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they sleep badly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho atthaṃ gahetvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they get what they need, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthaṃ adhipajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they take it to be what they don’t need. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato kāyena vācāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An angry person </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vadhaṃ katvāna kodhano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">kills with body or speech; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhābhibhūto puriso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">overcome with anger, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhanajāniṃ nigacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they lose their wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhasammadasammatto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mad with anger, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasakyaṃ nigacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they fall into disgrace. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātimittā suhajjā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Relatives, friends, and loved ones </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parivajjanti kodhanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">avoid an irritable person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anatthajanano kodho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anger creates harm; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodho cittappakopano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">anger upsets the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhayamantarato jātaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That person doesn’t recognize </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ jano nāvabujjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the danger that arises within. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuddho atthaṃ na jānāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An angry person doesn’t know the good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuddho dhammaṃ na passati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">An angry person doesn’t see the truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhatamaṃ tadā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a person is beset by anger, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kodho sahate naraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">only blind darkness is left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kuddho uparodheti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An angry person destroys with ease </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukaraṃ viya dukkaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">what was hard to build. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchā so vigate kodhe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Afterwards, when the anger is spent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aggidaḍḍhova tappati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re tormented as if burnt by fire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dummaṅkuyaṃ padasseti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their look betrays their sulkiness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhūmaṃ dhūmīva pāvako; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a fire’s smoky plume. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato patāyati kodho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when their anger flares up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena kujjhanti mānavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they make others angry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāssa hirī na ottappaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have no conscience or prudence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vāco hoti gāravo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor any respectful speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kodhena abhibhūtassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">One overcome by anger </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na dīpaṃ hoti kiñcanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">has no island refuge anywhere. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tapanīyāni kammāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The deeds that torment a man </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāni dhammehi ārakā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are far from those that are good. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni ārocayissāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll explain them now; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ suṇātha yathā tathaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">listen to this, for it is the truth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuddho hi pitaraṃ hanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An angry person slays their father; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hanti kuddho samātaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">their mother, too, they slay. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuddho hi brāhmaṇaṃ hanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An angry person slays a saint; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hanti kuddho puthujjanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a normal person, too, they slay. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāya mātu bhato poso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man is raised by his mother, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imaṃ lokaṃ avekkhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who shows him the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tampi pāṇadadiṃ santiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But an angry ordinary person slays </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hanti kuddho puthujjano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">even that good woman who gave him life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attūpamā hi te sattā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Like oneself, all sentient beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attā hi paramo piyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">hold themselves most dear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hanti kuddho puthuttānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But angry people kill themselves all kinds of ways, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nānārūpesu mucchito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">distraught for many reasons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asinā hanti attānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some kill themselves with swords, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">visaṃ khādanti mucchitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">some, distraught, take poison. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rajjuyā bajjha mīyanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Some hang themselves with rope, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pabbatāmapi kandare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or fling themselves down a mountain gorge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūnahaccāni kammāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they commit deeds of destroying life </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attamāraṇiyāni ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and killing themselves, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karontā nāvabujjhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t realize what they do, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodhajāto parābhavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for anger leads them to ruin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itāyaṃ kodharūpena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The snare of death in the form of anger </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maccupāso guhāsayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">lies hidden in the heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ damena samucchinde, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should cut it out by self-control, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññāvīriyena diṭṭhiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">by wisdom, energy, and right ideas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā metaṃ akusalaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">An astute person should cut out </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samucchindetha paṇḍito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">this unskillful thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatheva dhamme sikkhetha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they’d train in the teaching in just the same way, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mā no dummaṅkuyaṃ ahu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not yielding to sulkiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vītakodhā anāyāsā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Free of anger, free of despair, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vītalobhā anussukā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">free of greed, with no more longing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dantā kodhaṃ pahantvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">tamed, having given up anger, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbanti anāsavā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they become extinguished without defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abyākatavaggo chaṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abyākato purisagati, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tissa sīha arakkhiyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kimilaṃ satta pacalā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mettā bhariyā kodhekādasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
