<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.024-24. Dutiyasattakasutta  - 24. Non-Decline for Mendicants (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.024. 24. Dutiyasattakasutta  - 24. Non-Decline for Mendicants (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Vajjisattakavagga  - 3. The Vajji Seven </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satta vo, bhikkhave, aparihāniye dhamme desessāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you seven principles that prevent decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katame ca, bhikkhave, satta aparihāniyā dhammā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the seven principles that prevent decline? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhū na kammārāmā bhavissanti, na kammaratā, na kammārāmataṃ anuyuttā; vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as the mendicants don’t relish work, loving it and liking to relish it, they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhū na bhassārāmā bhavissanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as they don’t enjoy talk … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na niddārāmā bhavissanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">sleep … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saṅgaṇikārāmā bhavissanti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">company … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na pāpicchā bhavissanti na pāpikānaṃ icchānaṃ vasaṃ gatā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t have wicked desires, falling under the sway of wicked desires … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na pāpamittā bhavissanti na pāpasahāyā na pāpasampavaṅkā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t have bad friends, companions, and associates … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na oramattakena visesādhigamena antarāvosānaṃ āpajjissanti; vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they don’t stop half-way after achieving some insignificant distinction, they can expect growth, not decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, ime satta aparihāniyā dhammā bhikkhūsu ṭhassanti, imesu ca sattasu aparihāniyesu dhammesu bhikkhū sandississanti; vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they can expect growth, not decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
