<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.032-32. Appamādagāravasutta  - 32. Respect for Diligence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.032. 32. Appamādagāravasutta  - 32. Respect for Diligence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññatarā devatā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho sā devatā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattime, bhante, dhammā bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, these seven things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthugāravatā, dhammagāravatā, saṅghagāravatā, sikkhāgāravatā, samādhigāravatā, appamādagāravatā, paṭisanthāragāravatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Respect for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the training, for immersion, for diligence, and for hospitality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhante, satta dhammā bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These seven things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca sā devatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what that deity said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanuñño satthā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teacher approved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā devatā “samanuñño me satthā”ti bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that deity, knowing that the teacher approved, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassā rattiyā accayena bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that had happened, adding: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṃ, bhikkhave, rattiṃ aññatarā devatā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ jetavanaṃ obhāsetvā yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho, bhikkhave, sā devatā maṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sattime, bhante, dhammā bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame satta? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthugāravatā, dhammagāravatā, saṅghagāravatā, sikkhāgāravatā, samādhigāravatā, appamādagāravatā, paṭisanthāragāravatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhante, satta dhammā bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca, bhikkhave, sā devatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvā maṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā tatthevantaradhāyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthugaru dhammagaru, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Respect for the Teacher and the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃghe ca tibbagāravo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and keen respect for the Saṅgha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhigaru ātāpī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">respect for immersion, being energetic, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhāya tibbagāravo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and keen respect for the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appamādagaru bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who respects diligence </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭisanthāragāravo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and hospitality </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhabbo parihānāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">can’t decline, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbānasseva santike”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has drawn near to extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
