<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.036-36. Paṭhamamittasutta  - 36. A Friend (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.036. 36. Paṭhamamittasutta  - 36. A Friend (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato mitto sevitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should associate with a friend who has seven factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duddadaṃ dadāti, dukkaraṃ karoti, dukkhamaṃ khamati, guyhamassa āvi karoti, guyhamassa pariguhati, āpadāsu na jahati, khīṇena nātimaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give what is hard to give. They do what is hard to do. They endure what is hard to endure. They reveal their secrets to you. They keep your secrets. They don’t abandon you in times of trouble. They don’t look down on you in times of loss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi aṅgehi samannāgato mitto sevitabboti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should associate with a friend who has these seven factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duddadaṃ dadāti mitto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A friend gives what is hard to give, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkarañcāpi kubbati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and does what’s hard to do. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athopissa duruttāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They put up with your harsh words, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khamati dukkhamāni ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and with things hard to endure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Guyhañca tassa akkhāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They tell you their secrets, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">guyhassa parigūhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and keep your secrets for you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpadāsu na jahāti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t abandon you in times of trouble, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khīṇena nātimaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or look down on you in times of loss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yamhi etāni ṭhānāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The person in whom </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃvijjantīdha puggale; </span></p>
<p class="p3">these things are found is your friend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So mitto mittakāmena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you want to have a friend, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhajitabbo tathāvidho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should keep company with such a person.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
