<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>7.038-38. Paṭhamapaṭisambhidāsutta  - 38. Textual Analysis (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">7.038. 38. Paṭhamapaṭisambhidāsutta  - 38. Textual Analysis (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sattahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nacirasseva catasso paṭisambhidā sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities will soon realize the four kinds of textual analysis and live having achieved them with their own insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi sattahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What seven? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ me cetaso līnattan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is mental sluggishness’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattaṃ saṅkhittaṃ vā cittaṃ ‘ajjhattaṃ me saṅkhittaṃ cittan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand internally constricted mind as ‘internally constricted mind’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahiddhā vikkhittaṃ vā cittaṃ ‘bahiddhā me vikkhittaṃ cittan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand externally scattered mind as ‘externally scattered mind’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa viditā vedanā uppajjanti, viditā upaṭṭhahanti, viditā abbhatthaṃ gacchanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know feelings as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viditā saññā uppajjanti, viditā upaṭṭhahanti, viditā abbhatthaṃ gacchanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know perceptions as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viditā vitakkā uppajjanti, viditā upaṭṭhahanti, viditā abbhatthaṃ gacchanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They know thoughts as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappāyāsappāyesu kho panassa dhammesu hīnappaṇītesu kaṇhasukkasappaṭibhāgesu nimittaṃ suggahitaṃ hoti sumanasikataṃ sūpadhāritaṃ suppaṭividdhaṃ paññāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The patterns of qualities—suitable or unsuitable, inferior or superior, or those on the side of dark or bright—are properly grasped, attended, borne in mind, and comprehended with wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nacirasseva catasso paṭisambhidā sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these seven qualities will soon realize the four kinds of textual analysis and live having achieved them with their own insight.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
