<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.071-71. Cetokhilasutta  - 71. Emotional Barrenness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.071. 71. Cetokhilasutta  - 71. Emotional Barrenness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Satipaṭṭhānavagga  - 7. Mindfulness Meditation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, cetokhilā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are five kinds of emotional barrenness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satthari kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They’re uncertain, undecided, and lacking confidence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satthari kaṅkhati vicikicchati nādhimuccati na sampasīdati, tassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, ayaṃ paṭhamo cetokhilo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first kind of emotional barrenness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhamme kaṅkhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghe kaṅkhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the Saṅgha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhāya kaṅkhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">the training … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabrahmacārīsu kupito hoti anattamano āhatacitto khilajāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant is angry and upset with their spiritual companions, resentful and closed off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sabrahmacārīsu kupito hoti anattamano āhatacitto khilajāto, tassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa cittaṃ na namati ātappāya anuyogāya sātaccāya padhānāya, ayaṃ pañcamo cetokhilo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth kind of emotional barrenness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ cetokhilānaṃ pahānāya … pe … ime cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To give up these five kinds of emotional barrenness you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
