<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.018-18. Navaṅguposathasutta  - 18. The Sabbath with Nine Factors </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.018. 18. Navaṅguposathasutta  - 18. The Sabbath with Nine Factors </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Sīhanādavagga  - 2. The Lion’s Roar </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato uposatho upavuttho mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso mahājutiko mahāvipphāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the observance of the sabbath with its nine factors is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ upavuttho ca, bhikkhave, navahaṅgehi samannāgato uposatho mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso mahājutiko mahāvipphāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how should it be observed? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple reflects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yāvajīvaṃ arahanto pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭiviratā nihitadaṇḍā nihitasatthā lajjī dayāpannā sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampino viharanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭivirato nihitadaṇḍo nihitasattho lajjī dayāpanno sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I’ll be scrupulous and kind, and live full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi; uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā paṭhamena aṅgena samannāgato hoti … pe …. (1–7.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its first factor. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yāvajīvaṃ arahanto uccāsayanamahāsayanaṃ pahāya uccāsayanamahāsayanā paṭiviratā nīcaseyyaṃ kappenti—mañcake vā tiṇasanthārake vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious beds. They sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ uccāsayanamahāsayanaṃ pahāya uccāsayanamahāsayanā paṭivirato nīcaseyyaṃ kappemi—mañcake vā tiṇasanthārake vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I’ll sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi; uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā aṭṭhamena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its eighth factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mettāsahagatena cetasā ekaṃ disaṃ pharitvā viharati, tathā dutiyaṃ tathā tatiyaṃ tathā catutthaṃ. Iti uddhamadho tiriyaṃ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena pharitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā navamena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its ninth factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ upavuttho kho, bhikkhave, navahaṅgehi samannāgato uposatho mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso mahājutiko mahāvipphāro”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The observance of the sabbath with its nine factors in this way is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
