<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.011-11. Sīhanādasutta  - 11. Sāriputta’s Lion’s Roar </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.011. 11. Sīhanādasutta  - 11. Sāriputta’s Lion’s Roar </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Sīhanādavagga  - 2. The Lion’s Roar </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vuttho me, bhante, sāvatthiyaṃ vassāvāso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I have completed the rainy season residence at Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Icchāmahaṃ, bhante, janapadacārikaṃ pakkamitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I wish to depart to wander the countryside.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassadāni tvaṃ, sāriputta, kālaṃ maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, Sāriputta, go at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Sāriputta got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu acirapakkante āyasmante sāriputte bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then, not long after Sāriputta had left, a certain monk said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āyasmā maṃ, bhante, sāriputto āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkanto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Venerable Sāriputta attacked me and left without saying sorry.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā aññataraṃ bhikkhuṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha said to a certain monk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ehi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mama vacanena sāriputtaṃ āmantehi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please, monk, in my name tell Sāriputta that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘satthā taṃ, āvuso sāriputta, āmantetī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teacher summons him.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato paṭissutvā yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” that monk replied. He went to Sāriputta and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“satthā taṃ, āvuso sāriputta, āmantetī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, the teacher summons you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho āyasmā sāriputto tassa bhikkhuno paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” Sāriputta replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā ca mahāmoggallāno āyasmā ca ānando avāpuraṇaṃ ādāya vihāre āhiṇḍanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the venerables Mahāmoggallāna and Ānanda took a key and went from dwelling to dwelling, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhikkamathāyasmanto, abhikkamathāyasmanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come forth, venerables! Come forth, venerables! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idānāyasmā sāriputto bhagavato sammukhā sīhanādaṃ nadissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now Venerable Sāriputta will roar his lion’s roar in the presence of the Buddha!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha te, sāriputta, aññataro sabrahmacārī khīyanadhammaṃ āpanno: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sāriputta, one of your spiritual companions has made this complaint: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘āyasmā maṃ, bhante, sāriputto āsajja appaṭinissajjacārikaṃ pakkanto’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerable Sāriputta attacked me and left without saying sorry.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, pathaviyaṃ sucimpi nikkhipanti asucimpi nikkhipanti gūthagatampi nikkhipanti muttagatampi nikkhipanti kheḷagatampi nikkhipanti pubbagatampi nikkhipanti lohitagatampi nikkhipanti, na ca tena pathavī aṭṭīyati vā harāyati vā jigucchati vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose they were to toss both clean and unclean things on the earth, like feces, urine, spit, pus, and blood. The earth isn’t horrified, repelled, and disgusted because of this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, pathavīsamena cetasā viharāmi vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I live with a heart like the earth, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyya. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, āpasmiṃ sucimpi dhovanti asucimpi dhovanti gūthagatampi … muttagatampi … kheḷagatampi … pubbagatampi … lohitagatampi dhovanti, na ca tena āpo aṭṭīyati vā harāyati vā jigucchati vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose they were to wash both clean and unclean things in water, like feces, urine, spit, pus, and blood. The water isn’t horrified, repelled, and disgusted because of this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, āposamena cetasā viharāmi vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I live with a heart like water, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyya. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, tejo sucimpi ḍahati asucimpi ḍahati gūthagatampi … muttagatampi … kheḷagatampi … pubbagatampi … lohitagatampi ḍahati, na ca tena tejo aṭṭīyati vā harāyati vā jigucchati vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a fire was to burn both clean and unclean things, like feces, urine, spit, pus, and blood. The fire isn’t horrified, repelled, and disgusted because of this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, tejosamena cetasā viharāmi vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I live with a heart like fire, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyya. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, vāyo sucimpi upavāyati asucimpi upavāyati gūthagatampi … muttagatampi … kheḷagatampi … pubbagatampi … lohitagatampi upavāyati, na ca tena vāyo aṭṭīyati vā harāyati vā jigucchati vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose the wind was to blow on both clean and unclean things, like feces, urine, spit, pus, and blood. The wind isn’t horrified, repelled, and disgusted because of this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, vāyosamena cetasā viharāmi vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I live with a heart like the wind, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyya. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, rajoharaṇaṃ sucimpi puñchati asucimpi puñchati gūthagatampi … muttagatampi … kheḷagatampi … pubbagatampi … lohitagatampi puñchati, na ca tena rajoharaṇaṃ aṭṭīyati vā harāyati vā jigucchati vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose a rag was to wipe up both clean and unclean things, like feces, urine, spit, pus, and blood. The rag isn’t horrified, repelled, and disgusted because of this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, rajoharaṇasamena cetasā viharāmi vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I live with a heart like a rag, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyya. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, caṇḍālakumārako vā caṇḍālakumārikā vā kaḷopihattho nantakavāsī gāmaṃ vā nigamaṃ vā pavisanto nīcacittaṃyeva upaṭṭhapetvā pavisati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose an outcast boy or girl, holding a pot and clad in rags, were to enter a town or village. They’d enter with a humble mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, caṇḍālakumārakacaṇḍālakumārikāsamena cetasā viharāmi vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I live with a heart like an outcast boy or girl, abundant, limitless, measureless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyya. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, usabho chinnavisāṇo sūrato sudanto suvinīto rathiyāya rathiyaṃ siṅghāṭakena siṅghāṭakaṃ anvāhiṇḍanto na kiñci hiṃsati pādena vā visāṇena vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a bull with his horns cut, gentle, well tamed and well trained. He’d wander from street to street and square to square without hurting anyone with his feet or horns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, usabhachinnavisāṇasamena cetasā viharāmi vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I live with a heart like a bull with horns cut, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyya. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, itthī vā puriso vā daharo yuvā maṇḍanakajātiko sīsaṃnhāto ahikuṇapena vā kukkurakuṇapena vā manussakuṇapena vā kaṇṭhe āsattena aṭṭīyeyya harāyeyya jiguccheyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and had bathed their head. If the corpse of a snake or a dog or a human were hung around their neck, they’d be horrified, repelled, and disgusted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, iminā pūtikāyena aṭṭīyāmi harāyāmi jigucchāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I’m horrified, repelled, and disgusted by this rotten body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyya. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, puriso medakathālikaṃ parihareyya chiddāvachiddaṃ uggharantaṃ paggharantaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose someone was to carry around a bowl of fat that was leaking and oozing from holes and cracks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, imaṃ kāyaṃ pariharāmi chiddāvachiddaṃ uggharantaṃ paggharantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, I carry around this body that’s leaking and oozing from holes and cracks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa nūna, bhante, kāye kāyagatāsati anupaṭṭhitā assa, so idha aññataraṃ sabrahmacāriṃ āsajja appaṭinissajja cārikaṃ pakkameyyā”ti. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that monk rose from his seat, placed his robe over one shoulder, bowed with his head at the Buddha’s feet, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“accayo maṃ, bhante, accagamā yathābālaṃ yathāmūḷhaṃ yathāakusalaṃ, yo ahaṃ āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ asatā tucchā musā abhūtena abbhācikkhiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to speak ill of Venerable Sāriputta with a false, hollow, lying, untruthful claim. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa me, bhante, bhagavā accayaṃ accayato paṭiggaṇhatu āyatiṃ saṃvarāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha taṃ, bhikkhu, accayo accagamā yathābālaṃ yathāmūḷhaṃ yathāakusalaṃ, yo tvaṃ sāriputtaṃ asatā tucchā musā abhūtena abbhācikkhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, monk, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of you to act in that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ paṭikarosi, taṃ te mayaṃ paṭiggaṇhāma. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuḍḍhihesā, bhikkhu, ariyassa vinaye yo accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ paṭikaroti āyatiṃ saṃvaraṃ āpajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For it is growth in the training of the noble one to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“khama, sāriputta, imassa moghapurisassa, purā tassa tattheva sattadhā muddhā phalatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sāriputta, forgive that silly man before his head explodes into seven pieces right here.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khamāmahaṃ, bhante, tassa āyasmato sace maṃ so āyasmā evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I will pardon that venerable if he asks me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khamatu ca me so āyasmā’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘May the venerable please pardon me too.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
