<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.015-15. Gaṇḍasutta  - 15. The Simile of the Boil </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.015. 15. Gaṇḍasutta  - 15. The Simile of the Boil </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Sīhanādavagga  - 2. The Lion’s Roar </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṇḍo anekavassagaṇiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, suppose there was a boil that was many years old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassassu gaṇḍassa nava vaṇamukhāni nava abhedanamukhāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that boil had nine orifices that were continually open wounds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato yaṃ kiñci pagghareyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever oozed out of them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asuciyeva pagghareyya, duggandhaṃyeva pagghareyya, jegucchiyaṃyeva pagghareyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">would be filthy, stinking, and disgusting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci pasaveyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever leaked out them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asuciyeva pasaveyya, duggandhaṃyeva pasaveyya, jegucchiyaṃyeva pasaveyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">would be filthy, stinking, and disgusting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇḍoti kho, bhikkhave, imassetaṃ cātumahābhūtikassa kāyassa adhivacanaṃ mātāpettikasambhavassa odanakummāsūpacayassa aniccucchādanaparimaddanabhedanaviddhaṃsanadhammassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Boil’ is a term for this body made up of the four primary elements, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassassu gaṇḍassa nava vaṇamukhāni nava abhedanamukhāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And that boil has nine orifices that are continually open wounds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato yaṃ kiñci paggharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever oozes out of them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asuciyeva paggharati, duggandhaṃyeva paggharati, jegucchiyaṃyeva paggharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is filthy, stinking, and disgusting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci pasavati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever leaks out of them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asuciyeva pasavati, duggandhaṃyeva pasavati, jegucchiyaṃyeva pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is filthy, stinking, and disgusting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, imasmiṃ kāye nibbindathā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, mendicants, have no illusion about this body.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
