<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.005-5. Balasutta  - 5. Powers </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.005. 5. Balasutta  - 5. Powers </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sambodhivagga  - 1. Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, balāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these four powers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññābalaṃ, vīriyabalaṃ, anavajjabalaṃ, saṅgāhabalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The powers of wisdom, energy, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, paññābalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye dhammā kusalā kusalasaṅkhātā ye dhammā akusalā akusalasaṅkhātā ye dhammā sāvajjā sāvajjasaṅkhātā ye dhammā anavajjā anavajjasaṅkhātā ye dhammā kaṇhā kaṇhasaṅkhātā ye dhammā sukkā sukkasaṅkhātā ye dhammā sevitabbā sevitabbasaṅkhātā ye dhammā asevitabbā asevitabbasaṅkhātā ye dhammā nālamariyā nālamariyasaṅkhātā ye dhammā alamariyā alamariyasaṅkhātā, tyassa dhammā paññāya vodiṭṭhā honti vocaritā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One has clearly seen and clearly contemplated with wisdom those qualities that are skillful and considered to be skillful; those that are unskillful … blameworthy … blameless … dark … bright … to be cultivated … not to be cultivated … not worthy of the noble ones... worthy of the noble ones and considered to be worthy of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, paññābalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, vīriyabalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of energy? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye dhammā akusalā akusalasaṅkhātā ye dhammā sāvajjā sāvajjasaṅkhātā ye dhammā kaṇhā kaṇhasaṅkhātā ye dhammā asevitabbā asevitabbasaṅkhātā ye dhammā nālamariyā nālamariyasaṅkhātā, tesaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives to give up those qualities that are unskillful and considered to be unskillful; those that are blameworthy … dark … not to be cultivated … not worthy of the noble ones and considered to be not worthy of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye dhammā kusalā kusalasaṅkhātā ye dhammā anavajjā anavajjasaṅkhātā ye dhammā sukkā sukkasaṅkhātā ye dhammā sevitabbā sevitabbasaṅkhātā ye dhammā alamariyā alamariyasaṅkhātā, tesaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭilābhāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives to gain those qualities that are skillful and considered to be skillful; those that are blameless … bright … to be cultivated … worthy of the noble ones and considered to be worthy of the noble ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, vīriyabalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of energy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, anavajjabalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of blamelessness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako anavajjena kāyakammena samannāgato hoti, anavajjena vacīkammena samannāgato hoti, anavajjena manokammena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant has blameless conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, anavajjabalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of blamelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamañca, bhikkhave, saṅgāhabalaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the power of inclusiveness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, saṅgahavatthūni—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these four ways of being inclusive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dānaṃ, peyyavajjaṃ, atthacariyā, samānattatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, dānānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammadānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The best of gifts is the gift of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, peyyavajjānaṃ yadidaṃ atthikassa ohitasotassa punappunaṃ dhammaṃ deseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The best sort of kindly speech is to teach the Dhamma again and again to someone who is engaged and who lends an ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, atthacariyānaṃ yadidaṃ assaddhaṃ saddhāsampadāya samādapeti niveseti patiṭṭhāpeti, dussīlaṃ sīlasampadāya … macchariṃ cāgasampadāya … duppaññaṃ paññāsampadāya samādapeti niveseti patiṭṭhāpeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The best way of taking care is to encourage, settle, and ground the unfaithful in faith, the unethical in ethics, the stingy in generosity, and the ignorant in wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, samānattatānaṃ yadidaṃ sotāpanno sotāpannassa samānatto, sakadāgāmī sakadāgāmissa samānatto, anāgāmī anāgāmissa samānatto, arahā arahato samānatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The best kind of equality is the equality of a stream-enterer with another stream-enterer, a once-returner with another once-returner, a non-returner with another non-returner, and a perfected one with another perfected one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, saṅgāhabalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the power of inclusiveness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri balāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four powers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi balehi samannāgato ariyasāvako pañca bhayāni samatikkanto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple who has these four powers has got past five fears. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ājīvikabhayaṃ, asilokabhayaṃ, parisasārajjabhayaṃ, maraṇabhayaṃ, duggatibhayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fear regarding livelihood, disrepute, feeling insecure in an assembly, death, and bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kho so, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that noble disciple reflects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāhaṃ ājīvikabhayassa bhāyāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I have no fear regarding livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kissāhaṃ ājīvikabhayassa bhāyissāmi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why would I be afraid of that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi me cattāri balāni—</span></p>
<p class="p3">I have these four powers: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññābalaṃ, vīriyabalaṃ, anavajjabalaṃ, saṅgāhabalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the powers of wisdom, energy, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duppañño kho ājīvikabhayassa bhāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A witless person might fear for their livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kusīto ājīvikabhayassa bhāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lazy person might fear for their livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvajjakāyakammantavacīkammantamanokammanto ājīvikabhayassa bhāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who does blameworthy things by way of body, speech, and mind might fear for their livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṅgāhako ājīvikabhayassa bhāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who does not include others might fear for their livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṃ asilokabhayassa bhāyāmi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have no fear of disrepute … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāhaṃ parisasārajjabhayassa bhāyāmi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have no fear about feeling insecure in an assembly … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāhaṃ maraṇabhayassa bhāyāmi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have no fear of death … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāhaṃ duggatibhayassa bhāyāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I have no fear of a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kissāhaṃ duggatibhayassa bhāyissāmi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why would I be afraid of that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi me cattāri balāni—</span></p>
<p class="p3">I have these four powers: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññābalaṃ, vīriyabalaṃ, anavajjabalaṃ, saṅgāhabalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the powers of wisdom, energy, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duppañño kho duggatibhayassa bhāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A witless person might be afraid of a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kusīto duggatibhayassa bhāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lazy person might be afraid of a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvajjakāyakammantavacīkammantamanokammanto duggatibhayassa bhāyeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who does blameworthy things by way of body, speech, and mind might be afraid of a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṅgāhako duggatibhayassa bhāyeyya’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person who does not include others might be afraid of a bad rebirth.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi balehi samannāgato ariyasāvako imāni pañca bhayāni samatikkanto hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple who has these four powers has got past these five fears.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
