<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.043-43. Kāyasakkhīsutta  - 43. A Personal Witness </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.043. 43. Kāyasakkhīsutta  - 43. A Personal Witness </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Sāmaññavagga  - 5. Similarity </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Kāyasakkhī, kāyasakkhī’ti, āvuso, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, they speak of a person called ‘personal witness’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, āvuso, kāyasakkhī vutto bhagavatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the personal witness that the Buddha spoke of?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi … pe … paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures … enters and remains in the first absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā ca tadāyatanaṃ tathā tathā naṃ kāyena phusitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate directly experiencing that dimension in every way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, kāyasakkhī vutto bhagavatā pariyāyena. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">To this extent the Buddha spoke of the personal witness in a qualified sense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, āvuso, bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā … pe … dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">third absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā ca tadāyatanaṃ tathā tathā naṃ kāyena phusitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate directly experiencing that dimension in every way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, kāyasakkhī vutto bhagavatā pariyāyena. (2–4.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">To this extent the Buddha spoke of the personal witness in a qualified sense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, āvuso, bhikkhu sabbaso rūpasaññānaṃ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānaṃ atthaṅgamā nānattasaññānaṃ amanasikārā ‘ananto ākāso’ti ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā ca tadāyatanaṃ tathā tathā naṃ kāyena phusitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate directly experiencing that dimension in every way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, kāyasakkhī vutto bhagavatā pariyāyena … pe …. (5–8.) </span></p>
<p class="p3">To this extent the Buddha spoke of the personal witness in a qualified sense. Furthermore, take a mendicant who enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness … the dimension of nothingness … the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, āvuso, bhikkhu sabbaso nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ upasampajja viharati, paññāya cassa disvā āsavā parikkhīṇā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā ca tadāyatanaṃ tathā tathā naṃ kāyena phusitvā viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate directly experiencing that dimension in every way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, kāyasakkhī vutto bhagavatā nippariyāyenā”ti. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">To this extent the Buddha spoke of the personal witness in a definitive sense.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
