<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.065-65. Kāmaguṇasutta  - 65. Kinds of Sensual Stimulation </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.065. 65. Kāmaguṇasutta  - 65. Kinds of Sensual Stimulation </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Satipaṭṭhānavagga  - 7. Mindfulness Meditation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sotaviññeyyā saddā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sounds known by the ear … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānaviññeyyā gandhā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Smells known by the nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāviññeyyā rasā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Tastes known by the tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ kāmaguṇānaṃ pahānāya … pe … ime cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To give up these five kinds of sensual stimulation you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
