<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.039-39. Devāsurasaṅgāmasutta  - 39. The War Between the Gods and the Demons </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.039. 39. Devāsurasaṅgāmasutta  - 39. The War Between the Gods and the Demons </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Mahāvagga  - 4. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, devāsurasaṅgāmo samupabyūḷho ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, mendicants, a battle was fought between the gods and the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ kho pana, bhikkhave, saṅgāme asurā jiniṃsu, devā parājayiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In that battle the demons won and the gods lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parājitā ca, bhikkhave, devā apayiṃsuyeva uttarenābhimukhā, abhiyiṃsu asurā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Defeated, the gods fled north with the demons in pursuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, devānaṃ etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the gods thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘abhiyanteva kho asurā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The demons are still in pursuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūna mayaṃ dutiyampi asurehi saṅgāmeyyāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t we engage them in battle a second time?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho, bhikkhave, devā asurehi saṅgāmesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so a second battle was fought between the gods and the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho, bhikkhave, asurāva jiniṃsu, devā parājayiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a second time the demons won and the gods lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parājitā ca, bhikkhave, devā apayiṃsuyeva uttarenābhimukhā, abhiyiṃsu asurā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Defeated, the gods fled north with the demons in pursuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, devānaṃ etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the gods thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘abhiyanteva kho asurā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The demons are still in pursuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūna mayaṃ tatiyampi asurehi saṅgāmeyyāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t we engage them in battle a third time?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho, bhikkhave, devā asurehi saṅgāmesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so a third battle was fought between the gods and the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho, bhikkhave, asurāva jiniṃsu, devā parājayiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time the demons won and the gods lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parājitā ca, bhikkhave, devā bhītā devapuraṃyeva pavisiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Defeated and terrified, the gods fled right into the castle of the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devapuragatānañca pana, bhikkhave, devānaṃ etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they had entered their castle, they thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhīruttānagatena kho dāni mayaṃ etarahi attanā viharāma akaraṇīyā asurehī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Now we’re in a secure location and the demons can’t do anything to us.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asurānampi, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The demons also thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhīruttānagatena kho dāni devā etarahi attanā viharanti akaraṇīyā amhehī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Now the gods are in a secure location and we can’t do anything to them.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, devāsurasaṅgāmo samupabyūḷho ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Once upon a time, a battle was fought between the gods and the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ kho pana, bhikkhave, saṅgāme devā jiniṃsu, asurā parājayiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In that battle the gods won and the demons lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parājitā ca, bhikkhave, asurā apayiṃsuyeva dakkhiṇenābhimukhā, abhiyiṃsu devā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Defeated, the demons fled south with the gods in pursuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, asurānaṃ etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the demons thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘abhiyanteva kho devā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The gods are still in pursuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūna mayaṃ dutiyampi devehi saṅgāmeyyāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t we engage them in battle a second time?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho, bhikkhave, asurā devehi saṅgāmesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so a second battle was fought between the gods and the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho, bhikkhave, devā jiniṃsu, asurā parājayiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a second time the gods won and the demons lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parājitā ca, bhikkhave, asurā apayiṃsuyeva dakkhiṇenābhimukhā, abhiyiṃsu devā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Defeated, the demons fled south with the gods in pursuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, asurānaṃ etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the demons thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘abhiyanteva kho devā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The gods are still in pursuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūna mayaṃ tatiyampi devehi saṅgāmeyyāmā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t we engage them in battle a third time?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho, bhikkhave, asurā devehi saṅgāmesuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so a third battle was fought between the gods and the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho, bhikkhave, devā jiniṃsu, asurā parājayiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time the gods won and the demons lost. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parājitā ca, bhikkhave, asurā bhītā asurapuraṃyeva pavisiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Defeated and terrified, the demons fled right into the citadel of the demons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asurapuragatānañca pana, bhikkhave, asurānaṃ etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they had entered their citadel, they thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhīruttānagatena kho dāni mayaṃ etarahi attanā viharāma akaraṇīyā devehī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Now we’re in a secure location and the gods can’t do anything to us.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devānampi, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the gods also thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhīruttānagatena kho dāni asurā etarahi attanā viharanti akaraṇīyā amhehī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Now the demons are in a secure location and we can’t do anything to them.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye bhikkhussa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">At such a time the mendicant thinks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhīruttānagatena kho dānāhaṃ etarahi attanā viharāmi akaraṇīyo mārassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Now I’m in a secure location and Māra can’t do anything to me.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mārassāpi, bhikkhave, pāpimato evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Māra the Wicked also thinks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhīruttānagatena kho dāni bhikkhu etarahi attanā viharati akaraṇīyo mayhan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Now the mendicant is in a secure location and we can’t do anything to them.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā … pe … dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ … </span></p>
<p class="p3">third absorption … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye bhikkhussa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">At such a time the mendicant thinks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhīruttānagatena kho dānāhaṃ etarahi attanā viharāmi akaraṇīyo mārassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Now I’m in a secure location and Māra can’t do anything to me.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mārassāpi, bhikkhave, pāpimato evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Māra the Wicked also thinks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bhīruttānagatena kho dāni bhikkhu etarahi attanā viharati, akaraṇīyo mayhan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Now the mendicant is in a secure location and we can’t do anything to them.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye bhikkhu sabbaso rūpasaññānaṃ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānaṃ atthaṅgamā nānattasaññānaṃ amanasikārā ‘ananto ākāso’ti ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ‘bhikkhu antamakāsi māraṃ, apadaṃ vadhitvā māracakkhuṃ adassanaṃ gato pāpimato tiṇṇo loke visattikan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At such a time they are called a mendicant who has blinded Māra, put out his eyes without a trace, and gone where the Wicked One cannot see. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye bhikkhu sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘anantaṃ viññāṇan’ti viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaso viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘natthi kiñcī’ti ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaso nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ upasampajja viharati, paññāya cassa disvā āsavā parikkhīṇā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they entersand remain in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ‘bhikkhu antamakāsi māraṃ, apadaṃ vadhitvā māracakkhuṃ adassanaṃ gato pāpimato tiṇṇo loke visattikan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At such a time they are called a mendicant who has blinded Māra, put out his eyes without a trace, and gone where the Wicked One cannot see. And they’ve crossed over clinging to the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
