<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.021-21. Tiṭhānasutta  - 21. In Three Particulars </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.021. 21. Tiṭhānasutta  - 21. In Three Particulars </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sattāvāsavagga  - 3. Abodes of Sentient Beings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, ṭhānehi uttarakurukā manussā deve ca tāvatiṃse adhiggaṇhanti jambudīpake ca manusse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The humans of Uttarakuru surpass the Gods of the Thirty-Three and the humans of India in three particulars. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amamā, apariggahā, niyatāyukā, visesaguṇā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re selfless and not possessive. They have a fixed life span. They have a distinctive nature. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi ṭhānehi uttarakurukā manussā deve ca tāvatiṃse adhiggaṇhanti jambudīpake ca manusse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The humans of Uttarakuru surpass the Gods of the Thirty-Three and the humans of India in these three particulars. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhi, bhikkhave, ṭhānehi devā tāvatiṃsā uttarakuruke ca manusse adhiggaṇhanti jambudīpake ca manusse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Gods of the Thirty-Three surpass the humans of Uttarakuru and India in three particulars. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dibbena āyunā, dibbena vaṇṇena, dibbena sukhena—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Divine life span, beauty, and happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi ṭhānehi devā tāvatiṃsā uttarakuruke ca manusse adhiggaṇhanti jambudīpake ca manusse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Gods of the Thirty-Three surpass the humans of Uttarakuru and India in these three particulars. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhi, bhikkhave, ṭhānehi jambudīpakā manussā uttarakuruke ca manusse adhiggaṇhanti deve ca tāvatiṃse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The humans of India surpass the humans of Uttarakuru and the Gods of the Thirty-Three in three particulars. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sūrā, satimanto, idha brahmacariyavāso—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bravery, mindfulness, and the spiritual life is lived here. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi ṭhānehi jambudīpakā manussā uttarakuruke ca manusse adhiggaṇhanti deve ca tāvatiṃse”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The humans of India surpass the humans of Uttarakuru and the Gods of the Thirty-Three in these three particulars.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
