<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.051-51. Diṭṭhadhammanibbānasutta  - 51. Extinguishment in the Present Life </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.051. 51. Diṭṭhadhammanibbānasutta  - 51. Extinguishment in the Present Life </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Sāmaññavagga  - 5. Similarity </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Diṭṭhadhammanibbānaṃ diṭṭhadhammanibbānan’ti, āvuso, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend, they speak of ‘extinguishment in the present life’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, āvuso, diṭṭhadhammanibbānaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In what way did the Buddha speak of extinguishment in the present life?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi … pe … paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures … enters and remains in the first absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, diṭṭhadhammanibbānaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā pariyāyena … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To this extent the Buddha spoke of extinguishment in the present life in a qualified sense. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, āvuso, bhikkhu sabbaso nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ upasampajja viharati, paññāya cassa disvā āsavā parikkhīṇā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, diṭṭhadhammanibbānaṃ vuttaṃ bhagavatā nippariyāyenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To this extent the Buddha spoke of extinguishment in the present life in a definitive sense.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmaññavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sambādho kāyasakkhī paññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhatobhāgo sandiṭṭhikā dve; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbānaṃ parinibbānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadaṅgadiṭṭhadhammikena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamo paṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
