<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.023-23. Taṇhāmūlakasutta  - 23. Rooted in Craving </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.023. 23. Taṇhāmūlakasutta  - 23. Rooted in Craving </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sattāvāsavagga  - 3. Abodes of Sentient Beings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nava, bhikkhave, taṇhāmūlake dhamme desessāmi, taṃ suṇātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you about nine things rooted in craving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, nava taṇhāmūlakā dhammā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the nine things rooted in craving? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṇhaṃ paṭicca pariyesanā, pariyesanaṃ paṭicca lābho, lābhaṃ paṭicca vinicchayo, vinicchayaṃ paṭicca chandarāgo, chandarāgaṃ paṭicca ajjhosānaṃ, ajjhosānaṃ paṭicca pariggaho, pariggahaṃ paṭicca macchariyaṃ, macchariyaṃ paṭicca ārakkho, ārakkhādhikaraṇaṃ daṇḍādānaṃ satthādānaṃ kalahaviggahavivādatuvaṃtuvaṃpesuññamusāvādā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Craving is a cause for seeking. Seeking is a cause for gaining material possessions. Gaining material possessions is a cause for assessing. Assessing is a cause for desire and lust. Desire and lust is a cause for attachment. Attachment is a cause for possessiveness. Possessiveness is a cause for stinginess. Stinginess is a cause for safeguarding. Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and fights, accusations, divisive speech, and lies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, nava taṇhāmūlakā dhammā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the nine things rooted in craving.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
