<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.004-4. Nandakasutta  - 4. With Nandaka </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.004. 4. Nandakasutta  - 4. With Nandaka </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sambodhivagga  - 1. Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā nandako upaṭṭhānasālāyaṃ bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṃseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Nandaka was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenupaṭṭhānasālā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bahidvārakoṭṭhake aṭṭhāsi kathāpariyosānaṃ āgamayamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the assembly hall. He stood outside the door waiting for the talk to end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā kathāpariyosānaṃ viditvā ukkāsetvā aggaḷaṃ ākoṭesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he knew the talk had ended he cleared his throat and knocked with the latch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivariṃsu kho te bhikkhū bhagavato dvāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mendicants opened the door for the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā upaṭṭhānasālaṃ pavisitvā paññattāsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he entered the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ nandakaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He said to Nandaka, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dīgho kho tyāyaṃ, nandaka, dhammapariyāyo bhikkhūnaṃ paṭibhāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nandaka, that was a long exposition of the teaching you gave to the mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api me piṭṭhi āgilāyati bahidvārakoṭṭhake ṭhitassa kathāpariyosānaṃ āgamayamānassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">My back was aching while I stood outside the door waiting for the talk to end.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā nandako sārajjamānarūpo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Nandaka felt embarrassed and said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kho pana mayaṃ, bhante, jānāma ‘bhagavā bahidvārakoṭṭhake ṭhito’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, we didn’t know that the Buddha was standing outside the door. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace hi mayaṃ, bhante, jāneyyāma ‘bhagavā bahidvārakoṭṭhake ṭhito’ti, ettakampi () no nappaṭibhāseyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If we’d known, I wouldn’t have said so much.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ nandakaṃ sārajjamānarūpaṃ viditvā āyasmantaṃ nandakaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, knowing that Nandaka was embarrassed, said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sādhu sādhu, nandaka. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Good, good, Nandaka! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ kho, nandaka, tumhākaṃ patirūpaṃ kulaputtānaṃ saddhāya agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitānaṃ, yaṃ tumhe dhammiyā kathāya sannisīdeyyātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s appropriate for gentlemen like you, who have gone forth in faith from the lay life to homelessness, to sit together for a Dhamma talk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannipatitānaṃ vo, nandaka, dvayaṃ karaṇīyaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’re sitting together you should do one of two things: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammī vā kathā ariyo vā tuṇhībhāvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">discuss the teachings or keep noble silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddho ca, nandaka, bhikkhu hoti, no ca sīlavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nandaka, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they’re incomplete in that respect, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena taṃ aṅgaṃ paripūretabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and should fulfill it, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kintāhaṃ saddho ca assaṃ sīlavā cā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘How can I become faithful and ethical?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, nandaka, bhikkhu saddho ca hoti sīlavā ca, evaṃ so tenaṅgena paripūro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant is faithful and ethical, they’re complete in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddho ca, nandaka, bhikkhu hoti sīlavā ca, no ca lābhī ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but does not get internal serenity of heart. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they’re incomplete in that respect, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena taṃ aṅgaṃ paripūretabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and should fulfill it, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kintāhaṃ saddho ca assaṃ sīlavā ca lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘How can I become faithful and ethical and get internal serenity of heart?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, nandaka, bhikkhu saddho ca hoti sīlavā ca lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa, evaṃ so tenaṅgena paripūro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant is faithful and ethical and gets internal serenity of heart, they’re complete in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddho ca, nandaka, bhikkhu hoti sīlavā ca lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa, na lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant is faithful, ethical, and gets internal serenity of heart, but they don’t get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they’re incomplete in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, nandaka, pāṇako catuppādako assa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose, Nandaka, there was a four-footed animal </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa eko pādo omako lāmako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that was lame and disabled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ so tenaṅgena aparipūro assa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It would be incomplete in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, nandaka, bhikkhu saddho ca hoti sīlavā ca lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa, na lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant is faithful, ethical, and gets internal serenity of heart, but they don’t get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they’re incomplete in that respect, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena taṃ aṅgaṃ paripūretabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and should fulfill it, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kintāhaṃ saddho ca assaṃ sīlavā ca lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa lābhī ca adhipaññādhammavipassanāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘How can I become faithful and ethical and get internal serenity of heart and get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, nandaka, bhikkhu saddho ca hoti sīlavā ca lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa lābhī ca adhipaññādhammavipassanāya, evaṃ so tenaṅgena paripūro hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant is faithful and ethical and gets internal serenity of heart and gets the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, they’re complete in that respect.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ vatvāna sugato uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had spoken, the Holy One got up from his seat and entered his dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā nandako acirapakkantassa bhagavato bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then soon after the Buddha left, Venerable Nandaka said to the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idāni, āvuso, bhagavā catūhi padehi kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāsetvā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ paviṭṭho: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just now, reverends, the Buddha explained a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure in four statements, before getting up from his seat and entering his dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saddho ca, nandaka, bhikkhu hoti, no ca sīlavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Nandaka, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they’re incomplete in that respect, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena taṃ aṅgaṃ paripūretabbaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and should fulfill it, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kintāhaṃ saddho ca assaṃ sīlavā cā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can I become faithful and ethical?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, nandaka, bhikkhu saddho ca hoti sīlavā ca, evaṃ so tenaṅgena paripūro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant is faithful and ethical, they’re complete in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddho ca, nandaka, bhikkhu hoti sīlavā ca, no ca lābhī ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but does not get internal serenity of heart. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa, na lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They get internal serenity of heart, but they don’t get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they’re incomplete in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, nandaka, pāṇako catuppādako assa, tassa eko pādo omako lāmako, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose, Nandaka, there was a four-footed animal that was lame and disabled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena aparipūro assa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It would be incomplete in that respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, nandaka, bhikkhu saddho ca hoti sīlavā ca, lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa, na lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant is faithful, ethical, and gets internal serenity of heart, but they don’t get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So they’re incomplete in that respect, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena taṃ aṅgaṃ paripūretabbaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">and should fulfill it, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kintāhaṃ saddho ca assaṃ sīlavā ca, lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa, lābhī ca adhipaññādhammavipassanāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can I become faithful and ethical and get internal serenity of heart and get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho, nandaka, bhikkhu saddho ca hoti sīlavā ca lābhī ca ajjhattaṃ cetosamādhissa lābhī ca adhipaññādhammavipassanāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant is faithful and ethical and gets internal serenity of heart and gets the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ so tenaṅgena paripūro hotīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re complete in that respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcime, āvuso, ānisaṃsā kālena dhammassavane kālena dhammasākacchāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reverends, there are these five benefits of listening to the teachings at the right time and discussing the teachings at the right time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā, āvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti tathā tathā so satthu piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whenever they do this, they become liked and approved by the Teacher, respected and admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, āvuso, paṭhamo ānisaṃso kālena dhammassavane kālena dhammasākacchāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first benefit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, āvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. Yathā yathā, āvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti tathā tathā so tasmiṃ dhamme atthappaṭisaṃvedī ca hoti dhammappaṭisaṃvedī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whenever they do this, they feel inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, āvuso, dutiyo ānisaṃso kālena dhammassavane kālena dhammasākacchāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second benefit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, āvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā, āvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ … pe … brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti tathā tathā so tasmiṃ dhamme gambhīraṃ atthapadaṃ paññāya ativijjha passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whenever they do this, they see the meaning of a deep saying in that Dhamma with penetrating wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, āvuso, tatiyo ānisaṃso kālena dhammassavane kālena dhammasākacchāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third benefit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, āvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ … pe … brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā, āvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ … pe … brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti tathā tathā naṃ sabrahmacārī uttari sambhāventi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whenever they do this, their spiritual companions esteem them more highly, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘addhā ayamāyasmā patto vā pajjati vā’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘For sure this venerable has attained or will attain.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, āvuso, catuttho ānisaṃso kālena dhammassavane kālena dhammasākacchāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth benefit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, āvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā yathā, āvuso, bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti, tattha ye kho bhikkhū sekhā appattamānasā anuttaraṃ yogakkhemaṃ patthayamānā viharanti, te taṃ dhammaṃ sutvā vīriyaṃ ārabhanti appattassa pattiyā anadhigatassa adhigamāya asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whenever they do this, there may be trainee mendicants present, who haven’t achieved their heart’s desire, but live aspiring to the supreme sanctuary. Hearing that teaching, they rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye pana tattha bhikkhū arahanto khīṇāsavā vusitavanto katakaraṇīyā ohitabhārā anuppattasadatthā parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojanā sammadaññāvimuttā, te taṃ dhammaṃ sutvā diṭṭhadhammasukhavihāraṃyeva anuyuttā viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There may be perfected mendicants present, who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, a chieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and are rightly freed through enlightenment. Hearing that teaching, they simply wish to live happily in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, āvuso, pañcamo ānisaṃso kālena dhammassavane kālena dhammasākacchāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth benefit … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, āvuso, pañca ānisaṃsā kālena dhammassavane kālena dhammasākacchāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five benefits of listening to the teachings at the right time and discussing the teachings at the right time.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
