<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.025-25. Paññāsutta  - 25. Consolidated by Wisdom </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.025. 25. Paññāsutta  - 25. Consolidated by Wisdom </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sattāvāsavagga  - 3. Abodes of Sentient Beings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti, tassetaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno kallaṃ vacanāya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a mendicant’s mind has been well consolidated with wisdom it’s appropriate for them to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.”’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant’s mind well consolidated with wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Vītarāgaṃ me cittan’ti paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mind is well consolidated with wisdom when they know: ‘My mind is without greed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vītadosaṃ me cittan’ti paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘My mind is without hate.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘vītamohaṃ me cittan’ti paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘My mind is without delusion.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asarāgadhammaṃ me cittan’ti paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘My mind is not liable to become greedy.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asadosadhammaṃ me cittan’ti paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘My mind is not liable to become hateful.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘asamohadhammaṃ me cittan’ti paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘My mind is not liable to become deluded.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anāvattidhammaṃ me cittaṃ kāmabhavāyā’ti paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the sensual realm.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anāvattidhammaṃ me cittaṃ rūpabhavāyā’ti paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the realm of luminous form.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anāvattidhammaṃ me cittaṃ arūpabhavāyā’ti paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the formless realm.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno paññāya cittaṃ suparicitaṃ hoti, tassetaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno kallaṃ vacanāya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant’s mind has been well consolidated with wisdom it’s appropriate for them to say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānāmī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
