<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.002-2. Nissayasutta  - 2. Supported </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.002. 2. Nissayasutta  - 2. Supported </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sambodhivagga  - 1. Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘nissayasampanno nissayasampanno’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of being ‘supported’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, bhikkhu nissayasampanno hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a mendicant who is supported defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddhañce, bhikkhu, bhikkhu nissāya akusalaṃ pajahati kusalaṃ bhāveti, pahīnamevassa taṃ akusalaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicant, if a mendicant supported by faith gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, the unskillful is actually given up by them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hiriñce, bhikkhu, bhikkhu nissāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant supported by conscience … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ottappañce, bhikkhu, bhikkhu nissāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant supported by prudence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyañce, bhikkhu, bhikkhu nissāya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant supported by energy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññañce, bhikkhu, bhikkhu nissāya akusalaṃ pajahati kusalaṃ bhāveti, pahīnamevassa taṃ akusalaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a mendicant supported by wisdom gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, the unskillful is actually given up by them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ hissa bhikkhuno akusalaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti suppahīnaṃ, yaṃsa ariyāya paññāya disvā pahīnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s been given up is completely given up when it has been given up by seeing with noble wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena ca pana, bhikkhu, bhikkhunā imesu pañcasu dhammesu patiṭṭhāya cattāro upanissāya vihātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant grounded on these five things should rely on four things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhu, bhikkhu saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After reflection, a mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, bhikkhu nissayasampanno hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is supported.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
