<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.073-73. Sikkhasutta  - 73. Weaknesses in Training and Effort </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.073. 73. Sikkhasutta  - 73. Weaknesses in Training and Effort </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Sammappadhānavagga  - 8. Right Efforts </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, sikkhādubbalyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five weaknesses when you’re training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipāto … pe … surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca sikkhādubbalyāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five weaknesses when you’re training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ sikkhādubbalyānaṃ pahānāya cattāro sammappadhānā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To give up these five weaknesses in your training you should develop the four right efforts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anuppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ anuppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anuppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ sikkhādubbalyānaṃ pahānāya ime cattāro sammappadhānā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To give up these five weaknesses in your training you should develop these four right efforts.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
