<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.024-24. Sattāvāsasutta  - 24. Abodes of Sentient Beings </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.024. 24. Sattāvāsasutta  - 24. Abodes of Sentient Beings </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sattāvāsavagga  - 3. Abodes of Sentient Beings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navayime, bhikkhave, sattāvāsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are nine abodes of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame nava? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What nine? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, sattā nānattakāyā nānattasaññino, seyyathāpi manussā, ekacce ca devā, ekacce ca vinipātikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the underworld. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ paṭhamo sattāvāso. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first abode of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, sattā nānattakāyā ekattasaññino, seyyathāpi devā brahmakāyikā paṭhamābhinibbattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in perception, such as the gods reborn in Brahmā’s Host through the first absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ dutiyo sattāvāso. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second abode of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, sattā ekattakāyā nānattasaññino, seyyathāpi devā ābhassarā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ tatiyo sattāvāso. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third abode of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, sattā ekattakāyā ekattasaññino, seyyathāpi devā subhakiṇhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in perception, such as the gods replete with glory. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ catuttho sattāvāso. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth abode of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, sattā asaññino appaṭisaṃvedino, seyyathāpi devā asaññasattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sentient beings that are non-percipient and do not experience anything, such as the gods who are non-percipient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ pañcamo sattāvāso. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth abode of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, sattā sabbaso rūpasaññānaṃ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānaṃ atthaṅgamā nānattasaññānaṃ amanasikārā ‘ananto ākāso’ti ākāsānañcāyatanūpagā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they have been reborn in the dimension of infinite space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ chaṭṭho sattāvāso. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the sixth abode of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, sattā sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘anantaṃ viññāṇan’ti viññāṇañcāyatanūpagā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of infinite space. Aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they have been reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ sattamo sattāvāso. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh abode of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, sattā sabbaso viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘natthi kiñcī’ti ākiñcaññāyatanūpagā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness. Aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they have been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ aṭṭhamo sattāvāso. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the eighth abode of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi, bhikkhave, sattā sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanūpagā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of nothingness. They have been reborn in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ navamo sattāvāso. (9) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the ninth abode of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, nava sattāvāsā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the nine abodes of sentient beings.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
