<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.064-64. Nīvaraṇasutta  - 64. Hindrances </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.064. 64. Nīvaraṇasutta  - 64. Hindrances </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Satipaṭṭhānavagga  - 7. Mindfulness Meditation </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, nīvaraṇāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these five hindrances. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What five? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmacchandanīvaraṇaṃ, byāpādanīvaraṇaṃ, thinamiddhanīvaraṇaṃ, uddhaccakukkuccanīvaraṇaṃ, vicikicchānīvaraṇaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca nīvaraṇāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five hindrances. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ nīvaraṇānaṃ pahānāya cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To give up these five hindrances you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cattāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanāsu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citte … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of the mind … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṃ nīvaraṇānaṃ pahānāya ime cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvetabbā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">To give up those five hindrances you should develop these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
