<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.007-7. Sutavāsutta  - 7. With Sutavā the Wanderer </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.007. 7. Sutavāsutta  - 7. With Sutavā the Wanderer </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Sambodhivagga  - 1. Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sutavā paribbājako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Sutavā went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho sutavā paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ekamidāhaṃ, bhante, samayaṃ bhagavā idheva rājagahe viharāmi giribbaje. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, one time the Buddha was staying right here in Rājagaha, the Mountain Keep. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra me, bhante, bhagavato sammukhā sutaṃ sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There I heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so, sutavā, bhikkhu arahaṃ khīṇāsavo vusitavā katakaraṇīyo ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojano sammadaññāvimutto, abhabbo so pañca ṭhānāni ajjhācarituṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and is rightly freed through enlightenment—can’t transgress in five respects. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu sañcicca pāṇaṃ jīvitā voropetuṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu adinnaṃ theyyasaṅkhātaṃ ādātuṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevituṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu sampajānamusā bhāsituṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu sannidhikārakaṃ kāme paribhuñjituṃ seyyathāpi pubbe agāriyabhūto’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with defilements ended can’t deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something with the intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods for their own enjoyment like they did as a lay person.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci metaṃ, bhante, bhagavato sussutaṃ suggahitaṃ sumanasikataṃ sūpadhāritan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">I trust I properly heard, learned, attended, and remembered that from the Buddha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha te etaṃ, sutavā, sussutaṃ suggahitaṃ sumanasikataṃ sūpadhāritaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, Sutavā, you properly heard, learned, attended, and remembered that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe cāhaṃ, sutavā, etarahi ca evaṃ vadāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past, as today, I say this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so bhikkhu arahaṃ khīṇāsavo vusitavā katakaraṇīyo ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojano sammadaññāvimutto, abhabbo so nava ṭhānāni ajjhācarituṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and is rightly freed through enlightenment—can’t transgress in nine respects. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu sañcicca pāṇaṃ jīvitā voropetuṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu adinnaṃ theyyasaṅkhātaṃ ādātuṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevituṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu sampajānamusā bhāsituṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu sannidhikārakaṃ kāme paribhuñjituṃ seyyathāpi pubbe agāriyabhūto, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu chandāgatiṃ gantuṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu dosāgatiṃ gantuṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu mohāgatiṃ gantuṃ, abhabbo khīṇāsavo bhikkhu bhayāgatiṃ gantuṃ’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with defilements ended can’t deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something with the intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods for their own enjoyment like they did as a lay person. And they can’t make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or cowardice.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe cāhaṃ, sutavā, etarahi ca evaṃ vadāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the past, as today, I say this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yo so bhikkhu arahaṃ khīṇāsavo vusitavā katakaraṇīyo ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojano sammadaññāvimutto, abhabbo so imāni nava ṭhānāni ajjhācaritun’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and is rightly freed through enlightenment—can’t transgress in these nine respects.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
