<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.014-14. Samiddhisutta  - 14. With Samiddhi </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.014. 14. Samiddhisutta  - 14. With Samiddhi </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Sīhanādavagga  - 2. The Lion’s Roar </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā samiddhi yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ samiddhiṃ āyasmā sāriputto etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Samiddhi went up to Venerable Sāriputta, bowed, and stood to one side. Venerable Sāriputta said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kimārammaṇā, samiddhi, purisassa saṅkappavitakkā uppajjantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Samiddhi, based on what do thoughts arise in a person?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāmarūpārammaṇā, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Based on name and form, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te pana, samiddhi, kva nānattaṃ gacchantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Where do they become diversified?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhātūsu, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the elements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃsamudayā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is their origin?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Phassasamudayā, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Contact is their origin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃsamosaraṇā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is their meeting place?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vedanāsamosaraṇā, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Feeling is their meeting place.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃpamukhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is their chief?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Samādhippamukhā, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Immersion is their chief.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃadhipateyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is their ruler?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Satādhipateyyā, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mindfulness is their ruler.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃuttarā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is their overseer?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Paññuttarā, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wisdom is their overseer.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃsārā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is their core?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vimuttisārā, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Freedom is their core.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃogadhā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is their culmination?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amatogadhā, bhante”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“They culminate in the deathless.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Kimārammaṇā, samiddhi, purisassa saṅkappavitakkā uppajjantī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘nāmarūpārammaṇā, bhante’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Samiddhi, when you were asked what is the basis on which thoughts arise in a person, you answered ‘name and form’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Te pana, samiddhi, kva nānattaṃ gacchantī’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘dhātūsu, bhante’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you were asked … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃsamudayā’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘phassasamudayā, bhante’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃsamosaraṇā’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘vedanāsamosaraṇā, bhante’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃpamukhā’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘samādhippamukhā, bhante’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃadhipateyyā’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘satādhipateyyā, bhante’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃuttarā’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘paññuttarā, bhante’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃsārā’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘vimuttisārā, bhante’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Te pana, samiddhi, kiṃogadhā’ti, iti puṭṭho samāno ‘amatogadhā, bhante’ti vadesi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what is their culmination, you answered ‘the deathless’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu sādhu, samiddhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good, good, Samiddhi! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho tvaṃ, samiddhi, puṭṭho puṭṭho vissajjesi, tena ca mā maññī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good that you answered each question. But don’t get conceited because of that.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
