<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.030-30. Āghātapaṭivinayasutta  - 30. Getting Rid of Resentment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.030. 30. Āghātapaṭivinayasutta  - 30. Getting Rid of Resentment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sattāvāsavagga  - 3. Abodes of Sentient Beings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navayime, bhikkhave, āghātapaṭivinayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these nine methods to get rid of resentment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame nava? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What nine? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Anatthaṃ me acari, taṃ kutettha labbhā’ti āghātaṃ paṭivineti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking: ‘They harmed me, but what can I possibly do?’ you get rid of resentment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anatthaṃ me carati, taṃ kutettha labbhā’ti āghātaṃ paṭivineti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking: ‘They are harming me …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anatthaṃ me carissati, taṃ kutettha labbhā’ti āghātaṃ paṭivineti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They will harm me …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">piyassa me manāpassa anatthaṃ acari … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They harmed someone I love …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthaṃ carati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They are harming someone I love …’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘anatthaṃ carissati, taṃ kutettha labbhā’ti āghātaṃ paṭivineti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They will harm someone I love …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appiyassa me amanāpassa atthaṃ acari … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They helped someone I dislike …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthaṃ carati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘They are helping someone I dislike …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthaṃ carissati, taṃ kutettha labbhā’ti āghātaṃ paṭivineti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking: ‘They will help someone I dislike, but what can I possibly do?’ you get rid of resentment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, nava āghātapaṭivinayā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the nine methods to get rid of resentment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
