<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>9.031-31. Anupubbanirodhasutta  - 31. Progressive Cessations </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">9.031. 31. Anupubbanirodhasutta  - 31. Progressive Cessations </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Sattāvāsavagga  - 3. Abodes of Sentient Beings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navayime, bhikkhave, anupubbanirodhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these nine progressive cessations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame nava? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What nine? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa kāmasaññā niruddhā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the first absorption, sensual perceptions have ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa vitakkavicārā niruddhā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa pīti niruddhā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the third absorption, rapture has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ jhānaṃ samāpannassa assāsapassāsā niruddhā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the fourth absorption, breathing has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samāpannassa rūpasaññā niruddhā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samāpannassa ākāsānañcāyatanasaññā niruddhā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samāpannassa viññāṇañcāyatanasaññā niruddhā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samāpannassa ākiñcaññāyatanasaññā niruddhā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca niruddhā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have ceased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, nava anupubbanirodhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the nine progressive cessations.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattāvāsavaggo tatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiṭhānaṃ khaḷuṅko taṇhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattapaññā silāyupo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve verā dve āghātāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupubbanirodhena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
