<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn109-Mahāpuṇṇamasutta  - The Longer Discourse on the Full-Moon Night </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Mahāpuṇṇamasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">The Longer Discourse on the Full-Moon Night </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 109  - Middle Discourses 109 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā tadahuposathe pannarase puṇṇāya puṇṇamāya rattiyā bhikkhusaṅghaparivuto abbhokāse nisinno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the full moon on the fifteenth day—and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ cīvaraṃ katvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then one of the mendicants got up from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, raised their joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Puccheyyāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ kiñcideva desaṃ, sace me bhagavā okāsaṃ karoti pañhassa veyyākaraṇāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’d like to ask the Buddha about a certain point, if you’d take the time to answer.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, sake āsane nisīditvā puccha yadākaṅkhasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, mendicant, take your own seat and ask what you wish.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu sake āsane nisīditvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">That mendicant took his seat and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ime nu kho, bhante, pañcupādānakkhandhā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, are these the five grasping aggregates: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ime kho, bhikkhu, pañcupādānakkhandhā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, they are,” replied the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu, bhante”ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā bhagavantaṃ uttariṃ pañhaṃ pucchi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he asked another question: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ime pana, bhante, pañcupādānakkhandhā kiṃmūlakā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, what is the root of these five grasping aggregates?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ime kho, bhikkhu, pañcupādānakkhandhā chandamūlakā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These five grasping aggregates are rooted in desire.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃyeva nu kho, bhante, upādānaṃ te pañcupādānakkhandhā, udāhu aññatra pañcahupādānakkhandhehi upādānan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, is that grasping the exact same thing as the five grasping aggregates? Or is grasping one thing and the five grasping aggregates another?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, bhikkhu, taṃyeva upādānaṃ te pañcupādānakkhandhā, nāpi aññatra pañcahupādānakkhandhehi upādānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Neither. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, bhikkhu, pañcasu upādānakkhandhesu chandarāgo taṃ tattha upādānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, the desire and greed for them is the grasping there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā pana, bhante, pañcasu upādānakkhandhesu chandarāgavemattatā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, can there be different kinds of desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā, bhikkhū”ti bhagavā avoca </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There can,” said the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha, bhikkhu, ekaccassa evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when someone thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘evaṃrūpo siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃvedano siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃsañño siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃsaṅkhāro siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ, evaṃviññāṇo siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘In the future, may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such choices, and such consciousness!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, siyā pañcasu upādānakkhandhesu chandarāgavemattatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how there be different kinds of desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā pana, bhante, khandhānaṃ khandhādhivacanaṃ hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what is the scope of the term ‘aggregates’ as applied to the aggregates?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kiñci, bhikkhu, rūpaṃ—atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā, oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā, hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā, yaṃ dūre santike vā—ayaṃ rūpakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci vedanā—atītānāgatapaccuppannā ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā, oḷārikā vā sukhumā vā, hīnā vā paṇītā vā, yā dūre santike vā—ayaṃ vedanākkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of feeling at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci saññā—atītānāgatapaccuppannā … pe … yā dūre santike vā—ayaṃ saññākkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of perception at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye keci saṅkhārā—atītānāgatapaccuppannā ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā, oḷārikā vā sukhumā vā, hīnā vā paṇītā vā, ye dūre santike vā—ayaṃ saṅkhārakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of choices at all … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ—atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā, oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā, hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā, yaṃ dūre santike vā—ayaṃ viññāṇakkhandho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, bhikkhu, khandhānaṃ khandhādhivacanaṃ hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the scope of the term ‘aggregates’ as applied to the aggregates.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo rūpakkhandhassa paññāpanāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the aggregate of form is found? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko hetu ko paccayo vedanākkhandhassa paññāpanāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is the cause, what is the reason why the aggregate of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko hetu ko paccayo saññākkhandhassa paññāpanāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko hetu ko paccayo saṅkhārakkhandhassa paññāpanāya? </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko hetu ko paccayo viññāṇakkhandhassa paññāpanāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness is found?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cattāro kho, bhikkhu, mahābhūtā hetu, cattāro mahābhūtā paccayo rūpakkhandhassa paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The four primary elements are the reason why the aggregate of form is found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phasso hetu, phasso paccayo vedanākkhandhassa paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contact is the reason why the aggregates of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phasso hetu, phasso paccayo saññākkhandhassa paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phasso hetu, phasso paccayo saṅkhārakkhandhassa paññāpanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and choices are found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmarūpaṃ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, nāmarūpaṃ paccayo viññāṇakkhandhassa paññāpanāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Name and form are the reasons why the aggregate of consciousness is found.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ pana, bhante, sakkāyadiṭṭhi hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how does identity view come about?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṃ adassāvī ariyadhammassa akovido ariyadhamme avinīto sappurisānaṃ adassāvī sappurisadhammassa akovido sappurisadhamme avinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when an uneducated ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ attato samanupassati rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ attani vā rūpaṃ rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanaṃ attato samanupassati vedanāvantaṃ vā attānaṃ attani vā vedanaṃ vedanāya vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard feeling as self, self as having feeling, feeling in self, or self in feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ attato samanupassati saññāvantaṃ vā attānaṃ attani vā saññaṃ saññāya vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard perception as self, self as having perception, perception in self, or self in perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre attato samanupassati saṅkhāravantaṃ vā attānaṃ attani vā saṅkhāre saṅkhāresu vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard choices as self, self as having choices, choices in self, or self in choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati viññāṇavantaṃ vā attānaṃ attani vā viññāṇaṃ viññāṇasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, sakkāyadiṭṭhi hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how identity view comes about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ pana, bhante, sakkāyadiṭṭhi na hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But sir, how does identity view not come about?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha, bhikkhu, sutavā ariyasāvako ariyānaṃ dassāvī ariyadhammassa kovido ariyadhamme suvinīto sappurisānaṃ dassāvī sappurisadhammassa kovido sappurisadhamme suvinīto </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s when an educated noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na rūpaṃ attato samanupassati na rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ na attani vā rūpaṃ na rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vedanaṃ attato samanupassati na vedanāvantaṃ vā attānaṃ na attani vā vedanaṃ na vedanāya vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard feeling as self, self as having feeling, feeling in self, or self in feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saññaṃ attato samanupassati na saññāvantaṃ vā attānaṃ na attani vā saññaṃ na saññāya vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard perception as self, self as having perception, perception in self, or self in perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saṅkhāre attato samanupassati na saṅkhāravantaṃ vā attānaṃ na attani vā saṅkhāre na saṅkhāresu vā attānaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard choices as self, self as having choices, choices in self, or self in choices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na viññāṇaṃ attato samanupassati na viññāṇavantaṃ vā attānaṃ na attani vā viññāṇaṃ na viññāṇasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, sakkāyadiṭṭhi na hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how identity view does not come about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ko nu kho, bhante, rūpe assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, what’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">feeling, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko saññāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko saṅkhāresu assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko viññāṇe assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">and consciousness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, bhikkhu, rūpaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ, ayaṃ rūpe assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ rūpaṃ aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, ayaṃ rūpe ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo rūpe chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ, idaṃ rūpe nissaraṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this is its escape. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho, bhikkhu, vedanaṃ paṭicca … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññaṃ paṭicca … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhāre paṭicca … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ, ayaṃ viññāṇe assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ viññāṇaṃ aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, ayaṃ viññāṇe ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo viññāṇe chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ, idaṃ viññāṇe nissaraṇan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for consciousness: this is its escape.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kathaṃ pana, bhante, jānato kathaṃ passato imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na hontī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how does one know and see so that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kiñci, bhikkhu, rūpaṃ—atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā—sabbaṃ rūpaṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti—evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“One truly sees any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">One truly sees any kind of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ—atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā—sabbaṃ viññāṇaṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti—evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, *all* consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, jānato evaṃ passato imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na hontī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to know and see so that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññatarassa bhikkhuno evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time one of the mendicants had the thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“iti kira, bho, rūpaṃ anattā, vedanā anattā, saññā anattā, saṅkhārā anattā, viññāṇaṃ anattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So it seems, good sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattakatāni kammāni kamattānaṃ phusissantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then what self will the deeds done by not-self affect?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tassa bhikkhuno cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the Buddha, knowing what that monk was thinking, addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṃ idhekacco moghapuriso avidvā avijjāgato taṇhādhipateyyena cetasā satthu sāsanaṃ atidhāvitabbaṃ maññeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s possible that some foolish person here—unknowing and ignorant, their mind dominated by craving—thinks they can overstep the teacher’s instructions. They think: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iti kira, bho, rūpaṃ anattā, vedanā anattā, saññā anattā, saṅkhārā anattā, viññāṇaṃ anattā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘So it seems, good sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anattakatāni kammāni kamattānaṃ phusissantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then what self will the deeds done by not-self affect?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭivinītā kho me tumhe, bhikkhave, tatra tatra dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, mendicants, you have been educated by me in questioning with regard to all these things in all such cases. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is form permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suffering, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, mendicants? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Is feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness permanent or impermanent?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aniccaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Impermanent, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dukkhaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suffering, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, yaṃ kiñci rūpaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā sabbaṃ rūpaṃ: ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So you should truly see any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kāci vedanā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should truly see any kind of feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci saññā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">perception … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci saṅkhārā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">choices … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ kiñci viññāṇaṃ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā sabbaṃ viññāṇaṃ: ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, *all* consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpasmimpi nibbindati, vedanāyapi nibbindati, saññāyapi nibbindati, saṅkhāresupi nibbindati, viññāṇasmimpi nibbindati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbindaṃ virajjati, virāgā vimuccati. Vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imasmiñca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne saṭṭhimattānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ anupādāya āsavehi cittāni vimucciṃsūti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of sixty mendicants were freed from defilements by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāpuṇṇamasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
