<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn104-Sāmagāmasutta  - At Sāmagāma </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Sāmagāmasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">At Sāmagāma </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 104  - Middle Discourses 104 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati sāmagāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying among the Sakyans near the village of Sāma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena nigaṇṭho nāṭaputto pāvāyaṃ adhunākālaṅkato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta had recently passed away at Pāvā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kālaṃkiriyāya bhinnā nigaṇṭhā dvedhikajātā bhaṇḍanajātā kalahajātā vivādāpannā aññamaññaṃ mukhasattīhi vitudantā viharanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">With his passing the Jain ascetics split, dividing into two factions, arguing, quarreling, and fighting, continually wounding each other with barbed words: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na tvaṃ imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ ājānāsi, ahaṃ imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ ājānāmi. Kiṃ tvaṃ imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ ājānissasi. Micchāpaṭipanno tvamasi, ahamasmi sammāpaṭipanno. Sahitaṃ me, asahitaṃ te. Purevacanīyaṃ pacchā avaca, pacchāvacanīyaṃ pure avaca. Adhiciṇṇaṃ te viparāvattaṃ. Āropito te vādo. Niggahitosi, cara vādappamokkhāya; nibbeṭhehi vā sace pahosī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vadhoyeva kho maññe nigaṇṭhesu nāṭaputtiyesu vattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’d think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the Jain ascetics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi nigaṇṭhassa nāṭaputtassa sāvakā gihī odātavasanā tepi nigaṇṭhesu nāṭaputtiyesu nibbinnarūpā virattarūpā paṭivānarūpā yathā taṃ durakkhāte dhammavinaye duppavedite aniyyānike anupasamasaṃvattanike asammāsambuddhappavedite bhinnathūpe appaṭisaraṇe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta’s white-clothed lay disciples were disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain ascetics. They were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with broken monument and without a refuge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho cundo samaṇuddeso pāvāyaṃ vassaṃvuṭṭho yena sāmagāmo yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho cundo samaṇuddeso āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then, after completing the rainy season residence near Pāvā, the novice Cunda went to see Venerable Ānanda at Sāma village. He bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nigaṇṭho, bhante, nāṭaputto pāvāyaṃ adhunākālaṅkato. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kālaṃkiriyāya bhinnā nigaṇṭhā dvedhikajātā … pe … bhinnathūpe appaṭisaraṇe”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā ānando cundaṃ samaṇuddesaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“atthi kho idaṃ, āvuso cunda, kathāpābhataṃ bhagavantaṃ dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Cunda, we should see the Buddha about this matter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyāma, āvuso cunda, yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamissāma; upasaṅkamitvā etamatthaṃ bhagavato ārocessāmā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Come, let’s go to the Buddha and inform him about this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho cundo samaṇuddeso āyasmato ānandassa paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Cunda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ca ānando cundo ca samaṇuddeso yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Ānanda and Cunda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and Ānanda informed him of what Cunda had said. He went on to say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṃ, bhante, cundo samaṇuddeso evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nigaṇṭho, bhante, nāṭaputto pāvāyaṃ adhunākālaṅkato. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kālaṃkiriyāya bhinnā nigaṇṭhā dvedhikajātā … pe … bhinnathūpe appaṭisaraṇe’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, it occurs to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā heva bhagavato accayena saṃghe vivādo uppajji; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When the Buddha has passed away, let no dispute arise in the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">svāssa vivādo bahujanāhitāya bahujanāsukhāya bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For such a dispute would be for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, ānanda, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What do you think, Ānanda? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye vo mayā dhammā abhiññā desitā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Do you see even two mendicants who disagree regarding the things I have taught from my direct knowledge, that is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro satipaṭṭhānā cattāro sammappadhānā cattāro iddhipādā pañcindriyāni pañca balāni satta bojjhaṅgā ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, passasi no tvaṃ, ānanda, imesu dhammesu dvepi bhikkhū nānāvāde”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye me, bhante, dhammā bhagavatā abhiññā desitā, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir, I do not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro satipaṭṭhānā cattāro sammappadhānā cattāro iddhipādā pañcindriyāni pañca balāni satta bojjhaṅgā ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, nāhaṃ passāmi imesu dhammesu dvepi bhikkhū nānāvāde. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho, bhante, puggalā bhagavantaṃ patissayamānarūpā viharanti tepi bhagavato accayena saṃghe vivādaṃ janeyyuṃ ajjhājīve vā adhipātimokkhe vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nevertheless, there are some individuals who appear to live obedient to the Buddha, but when the Buddha has passed away they might create a dispute in the Saṅgha regarding livelihood or the monastic code. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Svāssa vivādo bahujanāhitāya bahujanāsukhāya bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a dispute would be for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appamattako so, ānanda, vivādo yadidaṃ—ajjhājīve vā adhipātimokkhe vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, dispute about livelihood or the monastic code is a minor matter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Magge vā hi, ānanda, paṭipadāya vā saṅghe vivādo uppajjamāno uppajjeyya; svāssa vivādo bahujanāhitāya bahujanāsukhāya bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But should a dispute arise in the Saṅgha concerning the path or the practice, that would be for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayimāni, ānanda, vivādamūlāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda, there are these six roots of disputes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu kodhano hoti upanāhī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant is irritable and hostile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, ānanda, bhikkhu kodhano hoti upanāhī so sattharipi agāravo viharati appatisso, dhammepi agāravo viharati appatisso, saṃghepi agāravo viharati appatisso, sikkhāyapi na paripūrakārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don’t fulfill the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, ānanda, bhikkhu satthari agāravo viharati appatisso, dhamme … saṃghe agāravo viharati appatisso, sikkhāya na paripūrakārī hoti, so saṃghe vivādaṃ janeti; yo hoti vivādo bahujanāhitāya bahujanāsukhāya, bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpañce tumhe, ānanda, vivādamūlaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā samanupasseyyātha, tatra tumhe, ānanda, tasseva pāpakassa vivādamūlassa pahānāya vāyameyyātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you see such a root of disputes in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpañce tumhe, ānanda, vivādamūlaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā na samanupasseyyātha. Tatra tumhe, ānanda, tasseva pāpakassa vivādamūlassa āyatiṃ anavassavāya paṭipajjeyyātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t see it, you should practice so that it doesn’t come up in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa pāpakassa vivādamūlassa pahānaṃ hoti, evametassa pāpakassa vivādamūlassa āyatiṃ anavassavo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to give up this bad root of quarrels, so it doesn’t come up in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhu makkhī hoti paḷāsī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant is offensive and contemptuous … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">issukī hoti maccharī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re jealous and stingy … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṭho hoti māyāvī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re devious and deceitful … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpiccho hoti micchādiṭṭhi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have wicked desires and wrong view … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sandiṭṭhiparāmāsī hoti ādhānaggāhī duppaṭinissaggī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, ānanda, bhikkhu sandiṭṭhiparāmāsī hoti ādhānaggāhī duppaṭinissaggī so sattharipi agāravo viharati appatisso, dhammepi agāravo viharati appatisso, saṃghepi agāravo viharati appatisso, sikkhāyapi na paripūrakārī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don’t fulfill the training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, ānanda, bhikkhu satthari agāravo viharati appatisso, dhamme … saṃghe … sikkhāya na paripūrakārī hoti so saṃghe vivādaṃ janeti; yo hoti vivādo bahujanāhitāya bahujanāsukhāya, bahuno janassa anatthāya ahitāya dukkhāya devamanussānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the hurt and unhappiness of the people, for the harm, hurt, and suffering of gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpañce tumhe, ānanda, vivādamūlaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā samanupasseyyātha. Tatra tumhe, ānanda, tasseva pāpakassa vivādamūlassa pahānāya vāyameyyātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you see such a root of quarrels in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpañce tumhe, ānanda, vivādamūlaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā na samanupasseyyātha, tatra tumhe, ānanda, tasseva pāpakassa vivādamūlassa āyatiṃ anavassavāya paṭipajjeyyātha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t see it, you should practice so that it doesn’t come up in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametassa pāpakassa vivādamūlassa pahānaṃ hoti, evametassa pāpakassa vivādamūlassa āyatiṃ anavassavo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how to give up this bad root of quarrels, so it doesn’t come up in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, ānanda, cha vivādamūlāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the six roots of quarrels. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattārimāni, ānanda, adhikaraṇāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are four kinds of disciplinary issues. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni cattāri? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivādādhikaraṇaṃ, anuvādādhikaraṇaṃ, āpattādhikaraṇaṃ, kiccādhikaraṇaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Disciplinary issues due to disputes, accusations, offenses, or proceedings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāni kho, ānanda, cattāri adhikaraṇāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the four kinds of disciplinary issues. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satta kho panime, ānanda, adhikaraṇasamathā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are seven methods for the settlement of any disciplinary issues that might arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppannuppannānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ samathāya vūpasamāya sammukhāvinayo dātabbo, sativinayo dātabbo, amūḷhavinayo dātabbo, paṭiññāya kāretabbaṃ, yebhuyyasikā, tassapāpiyasikā, tiṇavatthārako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removal in the presence of those concerned is applicable. Removal by accurate recollection is applicable. Removal due to recovery from madness is applicable. The offense should be acknowledged. The decision of a majority. A verdict of aggravated misconduct. Covering over with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, sammukhāvinayo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is there removal in the presence of those concerned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhū vivadanti dhammoti vā adhammoti vā vinayoti vā avinayoti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when mendicants are disputing: ‘This is the teaching,’ ‘This is not the teaching,’ ‘This is the training,’ ‘This is not the training.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tehānanda, bhikkhūhi sabbeheva samaggehi sannipatitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those mendicants should all sit together in harmony </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannipatitvā dhammanetti samanumajjitabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and thoroughly go over the guidelines of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammanettiṃ samanumajjitvā yathā tattha sameti tathā taṃ adhikaraṇaṃ vūpasametabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should settle that disciplinary issue in agreement with the guidelines. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, sammukhāvinayo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how there is removal in the presence of those concerned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca panidhekaccānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ vūpasamo hoti yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammukhāvinayena. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">by removal in the presence of those concerned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, yebhuyyasikā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is there the decision of a majority? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ce, ānanda, bhikkhū na sakkonti taṃ adhikaraṇaṃ tasmiṃ āvāse vūpasametuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If those mendicants are not able to settle that issue in that monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tehānanda, bhikkhūhi yasmiṃ āvāse bahutarā bhikkhū so āvāso gantabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they should go to another monastery with more mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tattha sabbeheva samaggehi sannipatitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There they should all sit together in harmony </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannipatitvā dhammanetti samanumajjitabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and thoroughly go over the guidelines of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammanettiṃ samanumajjitvā yathā tattha sameti tathā taṃ adhikaraṇaṃ vūpasametabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They should settle that disciplinary issue in agreement with the guidelines. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, yebhuyyasikā hoti, evañca panidhekaccānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ vūpasamo hoti yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how there is the decision of a majority. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyasikāya. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">by decision of a majority. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, sativinayo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is there removal by accurate recollection? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhū bhikkhuṃ evarūpāya garukāya āpattiyā codenti pārājikena vā pārājikasāmantena vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when mendicants accuse a mendicant of a serious offense; one entailing expulsion, or close to it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saratāyasmā evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na kho ahaṃ, āvuso, sarāmi evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘No, reverends, I don’t recall committing such an offense.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kho, ānanda, bhikkhuno sativinayo dātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The removal by accurate recollection is applicable to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, sativinayo hoti, evañca panidhekaccānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ vūpasamo hoti yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how there is the removal by accurate recollection. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sativinayena. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">by removal by accurate recollection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, amūḷhavinayo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is there removal by recovery from madness? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhū bhikkhuṃ evarūpāya garukāya āpattiyā codenti pārājikena vā pārājikasāmantena vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when mendicants accuse a mendicant of the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion, or close to it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saratāyasmā evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na kho ahaṃ, āvuso, sarāmi evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘No, reverends, I don’t recall committing such an offense.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ so nibbeṭhentaṃ ativeṭheti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But though they try to get out of it, the mendicants pursue the issue: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iṅghāyasmā sādhukameva jānāhi yadi sarasi evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ kho, āvuso, ummādaṃ pāpuṇiṃ cetaso vipariyāsaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverends, I had gone mad, I was out of my mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena me ummattakena bahuṃ assāmaṇakaṃ ajjhāciṇṇaṃ bhāsitaparikkantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And while I was mad I did and said many things that are not proper for an ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṃ taṃ sarāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t remember any of that, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mūḷhena me etaṃ katan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I was mad when I did it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kho, ānanda, bhikkhuno amūḷhavinayo dātabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The removal by recovery from madness is applicable to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, amūḷhavinayo hoti, evañca panidhekaccānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ vūpasamo hoti yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how there is the removal by recovery from madness. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">amūḷhavinayena. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">by recovery from madness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, paṭiññātakaraṇaṃ hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is there the acknowledging of an offense? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu codito vā acodito vā āpattiṃ sarati, vivarati uttānīkaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, whether accused or not, recalls an offense and clarifies it and reveals it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena, ānanda, bhikkhunā vuḍḍhataraṃ bhikkhuṃ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṃsaṃ cīvaraṃ katvā pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṃ nisīditvā añjaliṃ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching a more senior mendicant, that mendicant should arrange his robe over one shoulder, bow to that mendicant’s feet, squat on their heels, raise their joined palms, and say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṃ, bhante, itthannāmaṃ āpattiṃ āpanno, taṃ paṭidesemī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, I have fallen into such-and-such an offense. I confess it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The senior mendicant says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘passasī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Do you see it?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Āma passāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Yes, I see it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Āyatiṃsaṃvareyyāsī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Then restrain yourself in future.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saṃvarissāmī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I shall restrain myself.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, paṭiññātakaraṇaṃ hoti, evañca panidhekaccānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ vūpasamo hoti yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how there is the acknowledging of an offense. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭiññātakaraṇena. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">by acknowledging an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, tassapāpiyasikā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is there a verdict of aggravated misconduct? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ evarūpāya garukāya āpattiyā codeti pārājikena vā pārājikasāmantena vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant accuses a mendicant of the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion, or close to it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saratāyasmā evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na kho ahaṃ, āvuso, sarāmi evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘No, reverends, I don’t recall committing such an offense.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ so nibbeṭhentaṃ ativeṭheti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But though they try to get out of it, the mendicants pursue the issue: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iṅghāyasmā sādhukameva jānāhi yadi sarasi evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na kho ahaṃ, āvuso, sarāmi evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverends, I don’t recall committing a serious offense of that nature. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sarāmi ca kho ahaṃ, āvuso, evarūpiṃ appamattikaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But I do recall committing a light offense.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ so nibbeṭhentaṃ ativeṭheti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But though they try to get out of it, the mendicants pursue the issue: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘iṅghāyasmā sādhukameva jānāhi yadi sarasi evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imañhi nāmāhaṃ, āvuso, appamattikaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitvā apuṭṭho paṭijānissāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverends, I’ll go so far as to acknowledge this light offense even when not asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiṃ panāhaṃ evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitvā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā puṭṭho na paṭijānissāmī’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why wouldn’t I acknowledge a serious offense when asked?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imañhi nāma tvaṃ, āvuso, appamattikaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitvā apuṭṭho na paṭijānissasi, kiṃ pana tvaṃ evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitvā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā puṭṭho paṭijānissasi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You wouldn’t have acknowledged that light offense without being asked, so why would you acknowledge a serious offense? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iṅghāyasmā sādhukameva jānāhi yadi sarasi evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sarāmi kho ahaṃ, āvuso, evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverend, I do recall committing the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Davā me etaṃ vuttaṃ, ravā me etaṃ vuttaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">I spoke too hastily when I said </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāhaṃ taṃ sarāmi evarūpiṃ garukaṃ āpattiṃ āpajjitā pārājikaṃ vā pārājikasāmantaṃ vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I didn’t recall it.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, tassapāpiyasikā hoti, evañca panidhekaccānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ vūpasamo hoti yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how there is a verdict of aggravated misconduct. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassapāpiyasikāya. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">by a verdict of aggravated misconduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, tiṇavatthārako hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is there the covering over with grass? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhūnaṃ bhaṇḍanajātānaṃ kalahajātānaṃ vivādāpannānaṃ viharataṃ bahuṃ assāmaṇakaṃ ajjhāciṇṇaṃ hoti bhāsitaparikkantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when the mendicants continually argue, quarrel, and fight, doing and saying many things that are not proper for an ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tehānanda, bhikkhūhi sabbeheva samaggehi sannipatitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those mendicants should all sit together in harmony. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannipatitvā ekatopakkhikānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ byattena bhikkhunā uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ cīvaraṃ katvā añjaliṃ paṇāmetvā saṃgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent mendicant of one party, having got up from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, and raised their joined palms, should inform the Saṅgha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, let the Saṅgha listen to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ amhākaṃ bhaṇḍanajātānaṃ kalahajātānaṃ vivādāpannānaṃ viharataṃ bahuṃ assāmaṇakaṃ ajjhāciṇṇaṃ bhāsitaparikkantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">We have been continually arguing, quarreling, and fighting, doing and saying many things that are not proper for an ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṃ, ahaṃ yā ceva imesaṃ āyasmantānaṃ āpatti yā ca attano āpatti, imesañceva āyasmantānaṃ atthāya attano ca atthāya, saṅghamajjhe tiṇavatthārakena deseyyaṃ, ṭhapetvā thullavajjaṃ ṭhapetvā gihipaṭisaṃyuttan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Saṅgha, then—for the benefit of these venerables and myself—I disclose in the middle of the Saṅgha by means of covering over with grass any offenses committed by these venerables and by myself, excepting only those that are gravely blameworthy and those connected with laypeople.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athāparesaṃ ekatopakkhikānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ byattena bhikkhunā uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ cīvaraṃ katvā añjaliṃ paṇāmetvā saṅgho ñāpetabbo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a competent mendicant of the other party, having got up from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, and raising their joined palms, should inform the Saṅgha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sir, let the Saṅgha listen to me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ amhākaṃ bhaṇḍanajātānaṃ kalahajātānaṃ vivādāpannānaṃ viharataṃ bahuṃ assāmaṇakaṃ ajjhāciṇṇaṃ bhāsitaparikkantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">We have been continually arguing, quarreling, and fighting, doing and saying many things that are not proper for an ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṃ, ahaṃ yā ceva imesaṃ āyasmantānaṃ āpatti yā ca attano āpatti, imesañceva āyasmantānaṃ atthāya attano ca atthāya, saṅghamajjhe tiṇavatthārakena deseyyaṃ, ṭhapetvā thullavajjaṃ ṭhapetvā gihipaṭisaṃyuttan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Saṅgha, then—for the benefit of these venerables and myself—I disclose in the middle of the Saṅgha by means of covering over with grass any offenses committed by these venerables and by myself, excepting only those that are gravely blameworthy and those connected with laypeople.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, tiṇavatthārako hoti, evañca panidhekaccānaṃ adhikaraṇānaṃ vūpasamo hoti yadidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how there is the covering over with grass. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṇavatthārakena. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">by covering over with grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, ānanda, dhammā sāraṇīyā piyakaraṇā garukaraṇā saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda, these six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhuno mettaṃ kāyakammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with bodily kindness, both in public and in private. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo piyakaraṇo garukaraṇo saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattati. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhuno mettaṃ vacīkammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with verbal kindness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo piyakaraṇo garukaraṇo saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattati. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhuno mettaṃ manokammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with mental kindness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo piyakaraṇo garukaraṇo saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattati. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhu—ye te lābhā dhammikā dhammaladdhā antamaso pattapariyāpannamattampi tathārūpehi lābhehi—apaṭivibhattabhogī hoti, sīlavantehi sabrahmacārīhi sādhāraṇabhogī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material possessions they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo piyakaraṇo garukaraṇo saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattati. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhu—yāni tāni sīlāni akhaṇḍāni acchiddāni asabalāni akammāsāni bhujissāni viññuppasatthāni aparāmaṭṭhāni samādhisaṃvattanikāni tathārūpesu sīlesu—sīlasāmaññagato viharati sabrahmacārīhi āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those precepts are unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo piyakaraṇo garukaraṇo saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattati. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhu—yāyaṃ diṭṭhi ariyā niyyānikā niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāya tathārūpāya diṭṭhiyā—diṭṭhisāmaññagato viharati sabrahmacārīhi āvi ceva raho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and leads one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo piyakaraṇo garukaraṇo saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattati. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This too is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, ānanda, cha sāraṇīyā dhammā piyakaraṇā garukaraṇā saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime ce tumhe, ānanda, cha sāraṇīye dhamme samādāya vatteyyātha, passatha no tumhe, ānanda, taṃ vacanapathaṃ aṇuṃ vā thūlaṃ vā yaṃ tumhe nādhivāseyyāthā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you should undertake and follow these six warm-hearted qualities, do you see any criticism, large or small, that you could not endure?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tasmātihānanda, ime cha sāraṇīye dhamme samādāya vattatha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That’s why, Ānanda, you should undertake and follow these six warm-hearted qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vo bhavissati dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That will be for your lasting welfare and happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamano āyasmā ānando bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda was happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmagāmasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
