<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>mn117-Mahācattārīsakasutta  - The Great Forty </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">Mahācattārīsakasutta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t2">The Great Forty </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Majjhima Nikāya 117  - Middle Discourses 117 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ariyaṃ vo, bhikkhave, sammāsamādhiṃ desessāmi saupanisaṃ saparikkhāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you noble right immersion with its vital conditions and its prerequisites. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo ca, bhikkhave, ariyo sammāsamādhi saupaniso saparikkhāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what is noble right immersion with its vital conditions and its prerequisites? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi, sammāsaṅkappo, sammāvācā, sammākammanto, sammāājīvo, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kho, bhikkhave, imehi sattahaṅgehi cittassa ekaggatā parikkhatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unification of mind with these seven factors as prerequisites </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyo sammāsamādhi saupaniso itipi, saparikkhāro itipi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called noble right immersion with its vital conditions and also with its prerequisites. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, right view comes first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does right view come first? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchādiṭṭhiṃ ‘micchādiṭṭhī’ti pajānāti, sammādiṭṭhiṃ ‘sammādiṭṭhī’ti pajānāti—sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you understand wrong view as wrong view and right view as right view, that’s your right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, micchādiṭṭhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is wrong view? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Natthi dinnaṃ, natthi yiṭṭhaṃ, natthi hutaṃ, natthi sukatadukkaṭānaṃ kammānaṃ phalaṃ vipāko, natthi ayaṃ loko, natthi paro loko, natthi mātā, natthi pitā, natthi sattā opapātikā, natthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammaggatā sammāpaṭipannā ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There are no duties to mother and father. No beings are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is well attained and practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, micchādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right view? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhimpahaṃ, bhikkhave, dvāyaṃ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view is twofold, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi sāsavā puññabhāgiyā upadhivepakkā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is right view that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi ariyā anāsavā lokuttarā maggaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there is right view that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi sāsavā puññabhāgiyā upadhivepakkā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right view that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Atthi dinnaṃ, atthi yiṭṭhaṃ, atthi hutaṃ, atthi sukatadukkaṭānaṃ kammānaṃ phalaṃ vipāko, atthi ayaṃ loko, atthi paro loko, atthi mātā, atthi pitā, atthi sattā opapātikā, atthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammaggatā sammāpaṭipannā ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are duties to mother and father. There are beings reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are well attained and practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi sāsavā puññabhāgiyā upadhivepakkā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is right view that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi ariyā anāsavā lokuttarā maggaṅgā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right view that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, ariyacittassa anāsavacittassa ariyamaggasamaṅgino ariyamaggaṃ bhāvayato paññā paññindriyaṃ paññābalaṃ dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgo sammādiṭṭhi maggaṅgaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the wisdom—the faculty of wisdom, the power of wisdom, the awakening factor of investigation of principles, and right view as a factor of the path—in one of noble mind and undefiled mind, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi ariyā anāsavā lokuttarā maggaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called right view that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So micchādiṭṭhiyā pahānāya vāyamati, sammādiṭṭhiyā, upasampadāya, svāssa hoti sammāvāyāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They make an effort to give up wrong view and embrace right view: that’s their right effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sato micchādiṭṭhiṃ pajahati, sato sammādiṭṭhiṃ upasampajja viharati, sāssa hoti sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfully they give up wrong view and take up right view: that’s their right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itiyime tayo dhammā sammādiṭṭhiṃ anuparidhāvanti anuparivattanti, seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So these three things keep running and circling around right view, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, right view comes first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does right view come first? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāsaṅkappaṃ ‘micchāsaṅkappo’ti pajānāti, sammāsaṅkappaṃ ‘sammāsaṅkappo’ti pajānāti, sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you understand wrong thought as wrong thought and right thought as right thought, that’s your right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is wrong thought? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmasaṅkappo, byāpādasaṅkappo, vihiṃsāsaṅkappo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thoughts of sensuality, of malice, and of cruelty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is wrong thought. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right thought? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsaṅkappampahaṃ, bhikkhave, dvāyaṃ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right thought is twofold, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is right thought that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaṅgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there is right thought that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right thought that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhammasaṅkappo, abyāpādasaṅkappo, avihiṃsāsaṅkappo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is right thought that is accompanied by defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaṅgo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right thought that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, bhikkhave, ariyacittassa anāsavacittassa ariyamaggasamaṅgino ariyamaggaṃ bhāvayato takko vitakko saṅkappo appanā byappanā cetaso abhiniropanā vacīsaṅkhāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the thinking—the placing of the mind, thought, applying, application, implanting of the mind, verbal processes—in one of noble mind and undefiled mind, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaṅgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is right thought that is noble. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So micchāsaṅkappassa pahānāya vāyamati, sammāsaṅkappassa upasampadāya, svāssa hoti sammāvāyāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They make an effort to give up wrong thought and embrace right thought: that’s their right effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sato micchāsaṅkappaṃ pajahati, sato sammāsaṅkappaṃ upasampajja viharati; sāssa hoti sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfully they give up wrong thought and take up right thought: that’s their right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itiyime tayo dhammā sammāsaṅkappaṃ anuparidhāvanti anuparivattanti, seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So these three things keep running and circling around right thought, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, right view comes first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does right view come first? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāvācaṃ ‘micchāvācā’ti pajānāti, sammāvācaṃ ‘sammāvācā’ti pajānāti; sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you understand wrong speech as wrong speech and right speech as right speech, that’s your right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, micchāvācā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is wrong speech? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādo, pisuṇā vācā, pharusā vācā, samphappalāpo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, micchāvācā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is wrong speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammāvācā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right speech? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāvācampahaṃ, bhikkhave, dvāyaṃ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right speech is twofold, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammāvācā sāsavā puññabhāgiyā upadhivepakkā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is right speech that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammāvācā ariyā anāsavā lokuttarā maggaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there is right speech that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammāvācā sāsavā puññabhāgiyā upadhivepakkā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right speech that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādā veramaṇī, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī, samphappalāpā veramaṇī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The refraining from lying, divisive speech, harsh speech, and talking nonsense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sammāvācā sāsavā puññabhāgiyā upadhivepakkā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is right speech that is accompanied by defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammāvācā ariyā anāsavā lokuttarā maggaṅgā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right speech that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, ariyacittassa anāsavacittassa ariyamaggasamaṅgino ariyamaggaṃ bhāvayato catūhi vacīduccaritehi ārati virati paṭivirati veramaṇī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the desisting, abstaining, abstinence, and refraining from the four kinds of bad verbal conduct in one of noble mind and undefiled mind, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sammāvācā ariyā anāsavā lokuttarā maggaṅgā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is right speech that is noble. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So micchāvācāya pahānāya vāyamati, sammāvācāya upasampadāya; svāssa hoti sammāvāyāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They make an effort to give up wrong speech and embrace right speech: that’s their right effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sato micchāvācaṃ pajahati, sato sammāvācaṃ upasampajja viharati; sāssa hoti sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfully they give up wrong speech and take up right speech: that’s their right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itiyime tayo dhammā sammāvācaṃ anuparidhāvanti anuparivattanti, seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So these three things keep running and circling around right speech, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, right view comes first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does right view come first? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchākammantaṃ ‘micchākammanto’ti pajānāti, sammākammantaṃ ‘sammākammanto’ti pajānāti; sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you understand wrong action as wrong action and right action as right action, that’s your right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, micchākammanto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is wrong action? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipāto, adinnādānaṃ, kāmesumicchācāro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, micchākammanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is wrong action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammākammanto? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right action? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammākammantampahaṃ, bhikkhave, dvāyaṃ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right action is twofold, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammākammanto sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is right action that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammākammanto ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaṅgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there is right action that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammākammanto sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right action that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇātipātā veramaṇī, adinnādānā veramaṇī, kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sammākammanto sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is right action that is accompanied by defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammākammanto ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaṅgo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right action that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, ariyacittassa anāsavacittassa ariyamaggasamaṅgino ariyamaggaṃ bhāvayato tīhi kāyaduccaritehi ārati virati paṭivirati veramaṇī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the desisting, abstaining, abstinence, and refraining from the three kinds of bad bodily conduct in one of noble mind and undefiled mind, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sammākammanto ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaṅgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is right action that is noble. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So micchākammantassa pahānāya vāyamati, sammākammantassa upasampadāya; svāssa hoti sammāvāyāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They make an effort to give up wrong action and embrace right action: that’s their right effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sato micchākammantaṃ pajahati, sato sammākammantaṃ upasampajja viharati; sāssa hoti sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfully they give up wrong action and take up right action: that’s their right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itiyime tayo dhammā sammākammantaṃ anuparidhāvanti anuparivattanti, seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So these three things keep running and circling around right action, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, right view comes first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does right view come first? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchāājīvaṃ ‘micchāājīvo’ti pajānāti, sammāājīvaṃ ‘sammāājīvo’ti pajānāti; sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you understand wrong livelihood as wrong livelihood and right livelihood as right livelihood, that’s your right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, micchāājīvo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is wrong livelihood? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuhanā, lapanā, nemittikatā, nippesikatā, lābhena lābhaṃ nijigīsanatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and using material possessions to pursue other material possessions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, micchāājīvo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is wrong livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāājīvo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right livelihood? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāājīvampahaṃ, bhikkhave, dvāyaṃ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Right livelihood is twofold, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammāājīvo sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is right livelihood that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi, bhikkhave, sammāājīvo ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaṅgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And there is right livelihood that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāājīvo sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right livelihood that is accompanied by defilements, has the attributes of good deeds, and ripens in attachment? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako micchāājīvaṃ pahāya sammāājīvena jīvikaṃ kappeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple gives up wrong livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sammāājīvo sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is right livelihood that is accompanied by defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāājīvo ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaṅgo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is right livelihood that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā kho, bhikkhave, ariyacittassa anāsavacittassa ariyamaggasamaṅgino ariyamaggaṃ bhāvayato micchāājīvā ārati virati paṭivirati veramaṇī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s the desisting, abstaining, abstinence, and refraining from wrong livelihood in one of noble mind and undefiled mind, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sammāājīvo ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaṅgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is right livelihood that is noble. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So micchāājīvassa pahānāya vāyamati, sammāājīvassa upasampadāya; svāssa hoti sammāvāyāmo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They make an effort to give up wrong livelihood and embrace right livelihood: that’s their right effort. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sato micchāājīvaṃ pajahati, sato sammāājīvaṃ upasampajja viharati; sāssa hoti sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfully they give up wrong livelihood and take up right livelihood: that’s their right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Itiyime tayo dhammā sammāājīvaṃ anuparidhāvanti anuparivattanti, seyyathidaṃ—sammādiṭṭhi, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So these three things keep running and circling around right livelihood, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, right view comes first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does right view come first? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhissa, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo pahoti, sammāsaṅkappassa sammāvācā pahoti, sammāvācassa sammākammanto pahoti, sammākammantassa sammāājīvo pahoti, sammāājīvassa sammāvāyāmo pahoti, sammāvāyāmassa sammāsati pahoti, sammāsatissa sammāsamādhi pahoti, sammāsamādhissa sammāñāṇaṃ pahoti, sammāñāṇassa sammāvimutti pahoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives rise to right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right action gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to right effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right mindfulness gives rise to right immersion. Right immersion gives rise to right knowledge. Right knowledge gives rise to right freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato sekkho, dasaṅgasamannāgato arahā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the trainee has eight factors, while the perfected one has ten factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatrapi sammāñāṇena aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā vigatā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And here too, the eradication of many bad, unskillful qualities is fully developed due to right knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this context, right view comes first. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, sammādiṭṭhi pubbaṅgamā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does right view come first? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhissa, bhikkhave, micchādiṭṭhi nijjiṇṇā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right view, wrong view is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāsaṅkappassa, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo nijjiṇṇo hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right thought, wrong thought is worn away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācassa, bhikkhave, micchāvācā nijjiṇṇā hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right speech, wrong speech is worn away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammantassa, bhikkhave, micchākammanto nijjiṇṇo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right action, wrong action is worn away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvassa, bhikkhave, micchāājīvo nijjiṇṇo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is worn away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmassa, bhikkhave, micchāvāyāmo nijjiṇṇo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right effort, wrong effort is worn away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsatissa, bhikkhave, micchāsati nijjiṇṇā hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhissa, bhikkhave, micchāsamādhi nijjiṇṇo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is worn away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāñāṇassa, bhikkhave, micchāñāṇaṃ nijjiṇṇaṃ hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is worn away. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvimuttassa, bhikkhave, micchāvimutti nijjiṇṇā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are worn away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kho, bhikkhave, vīsati kusalapakkhā, vīsati akusalapakkhā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So there are twenty on the side of the skillful, and twenty on the side of the unskillful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahācattārīsako dhammapariyāyo pavattito appaṭivattiyo samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This exposition of the teaching on the Great Forty has been rolled forth. And it cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā imaṃ mahācattārīsakaṃ dhammapariyāyaṃ garahitabbaṃ paṭikkositabbaṃ maññeyya tassa diṭṭheva dhamme dasasahadhammikā vādānuvādā gārayhaṃ ṭhānaṃ āgacchanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If any ascetic or brahmin imagines they can criticize and reject the exposition of the teaching on the Great Forty, they deserve rebuke and criticism on ten legitimate grounds in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhiñce bhavaṃ garahati, ye ca micchādiṭṭhī samaṇabrāhmaṇā te bhoto pujjā, te bhoto pāsaṃsā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If such a gentleman criticizes right view, they praise and honor the ascetics and brahmins who have wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsaṅkappañce bhavaṃ garahati, ye ca micchāsaṅkappā samaṇabrāhmaṇā te bhoto pujjā, te bhoto pāsaṃsā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they criticize right thought … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvācañce bhavaṃ garahati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammākammantañce bhavaṃ garahati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right action … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāājīvañce bhavaṃ garahati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right livelihood … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvāyāmañce bhavaṃ garahati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right effort … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsatiñce bhavaṃ garahati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right mindfulness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāsamādhiñce bhavaṃ garahati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right immersion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāñāṇañce bhavaṃ garahati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">right knowledge … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammāvimuttiñce bhavaṃ garahati, ye ca micchāvimuttī samaṇabrāhmaṇā te bhoto pujjā, te bhoto pāsaṃsā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right freedom, they praise and honor the ascetics and brahmins who have wrong freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo koci, bhikkhave, samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā imaṃ mahācattārīsakaṃ dhammapariyāyaṃ garahitabbaṃ paṭikkositabbaṃ maññeyya tassa diṭṭheva dhamme ime dasasahadhammikā vādānuvādā gārayhaṃ ṭhānaṃ āgacchanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If any ascetic or brahmin imagines they can criticize and reject the exposition of the teaching on the Great Forty, they deserve rebuke and criticism on these ten legitimate grounds in the present life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yepi te, bhikkhave, ahesuṃ okkalā vassabhaññā ahetuvādā akiriyavādā natthikavādā tepi mahācattārīsakaṃ dhammapariyāyaṃ na garahitabbaṃ nappaṭikkositabbaṃ amaññiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even those wanderers of the past, Vassa and Bhañña of Ukkalā, who taught the doctrines of no-cause, inaction, and nihilism, didn’t imagine that the Great Forty should be criticized or rejected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nindābyārosaupārambhabhayā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For fear of being blamed, criticized, and faulted.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahācattārīsakasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
