<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.010-10. Mahānāmasutta  - 10. With Mahānāma </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.010. 10. Mahānāmasutta  - 10. With Mahānāma </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Āhuneyyavagga  - 1. Worthy of Offerings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ nigrodhārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahānāmo sakko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno, kho mahānāmo sakko bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo so, bhante, ariyasāvako āgataphalo viññātasāsano, so katamena vihārena bahulaṃ viharatī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, when a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood the instructions, what kind of meditation do they frequently practice?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo so, mahānāma, ariyasāvako āgataphalo viññātasāsano, so iminā vihārena bahulaṃ viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mahānāma, when a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood the instructions they frequently practice this kind of meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, mahānāma, ariyasāvako tathāgataṃ anussarati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, mahānāma, samaye ariyasāvako tathāgataṃ anussarati nevassa tasmiṃ samaye rāgapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na dosapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na mohapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujugatamevassa tasmiṃ samaye cittaṃ hoti tathāgataṃ ārabbha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time their mind is unswerving, based on the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujugatacitto kho pana, mahānāma, ariyasāvako labhati atthavedaṃ, labhati dhammavedaṃ, labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds joy in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vediyati, sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’re joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they’re blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahānāma: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyasāvako visamagatāya pajāya samappatto viharati, sabyāpajjāya pajāya abyāpajjo viharati, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno buddhānussatiṃ bhāveti’. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, mahānāma, ariyasāvako dhammaṃ anussarati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, mahānāma, samaye ariyasāvako dhammaṃ anussarati nevassa tasmiṃ samaye rāgapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na dosapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na mohapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple recollects the teaching their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujugatamevassa tasmiṃ samaye cittaṃ hoti dhammaṃ ārabbha. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujugatacitto kho pana, mahānāma, ariyasāvako labhati atthavedaṃ, labhati dhammavedaṃ, labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vediyati, sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahānāma: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyasāvako visamagatāya pajāya samappatto viharati, sabyāpajjāya pajāya abyāpajjo viharati, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno dhammānussatiṃ bhāveti’. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, mahānāma, ariyasāvako saṅghaṃ anussarati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ujuppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ñāyappaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, sāmīcippaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, yadidaṃ cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, straightforward, methodical, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, mahānāma, samaye ariyasāvako saṅghaṃ anussarati nevassa tasmiṃ samaye rāgapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na dosapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na mohapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujugatamevassa tasmiṃ samaye cittaṃ hoti saṅghaṃ ārabbha. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujugatacitto kho pana, mahānāma, ariyasāvako labhati atthavedaṃ, labhati dhammavedaṃ, labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vediyati, sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahānāma: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyasāvako visamagatāya pajāya samappatto viharati, sabyāpajjāya pajāya abyāpajjo viharati, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno saṅghānussatiṃ bhāveti’. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, mahānāma, ariyasāvako attano sīlāni anussarati akhaṇḍāni acchiddāni asabalāni akammāsāni bhujissāni viññuppasatthāni aparāmaṭṭhāni samādhisaṃvattanikāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own ethical conduct, which is unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, mahānāma, samaye ariyasāvako sīlaṃ anussarati nevassa tasmiṃ samaye rāgapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na dosapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na mohapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple recollects their ethical conduct their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujugatamevassa tasmiṃ samaye cittaṃ hoti sīlaṃ ārabbha. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujugatacitto kho pana, mahānāma, ariyasāvako labhati atthavedaṃ, labhati dhammavedaṃ, labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vediyati, sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahānāma: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyasāvako visamagatāya pajāya samappatto viharati, sabyāpajjāya pajāya abyāpajjo viharati, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno sīlānussatiṃ bhāveti’. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, mahānāma, ariyasāvako attano cāgaṃ anussarati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own generosity: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘lābhā vata me, suladdhaṃ vata me. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’m so fortunate, so very fortunate! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yohaṃ maccheramalapariyuṭṭhitāya pajāya vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasāmi muttacāgo payatapāṇi vosaggarato yācayogo dānasaṃvibhāgarato’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Among people full of the stain of stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, mahānāma, samaye ariyasāvako cāgaṃ anussarati nevassa tasmiṃ samaye rāgapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na dosapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na mohapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple recollects their own generosity their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujugatamevassa tasmiṃ samaye cittaṃ hoti cāgaṃ ārabbha. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujugatacitto kho pana, mahānāma, ariyasāvako labhati atthavedaṃ, labhati dhammavedaṃ, labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vediyati, sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahānāma: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyasāvako visamagatāya pajāya samappatto viharati, sabyāpajjāya pajāya abyāpajjo viharati, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno cāgānussatiṃ bhāveti’. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, mahānāma, ariyasāvako devatānussatiṃ bhāveti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the deities: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘santi devā cātumahārājikā, santi devā tāvatiṃsā, santi devā yāmā, santi devā tusitā, santi devā nimmānaratino, santi devā paranimmitavasavattino, santi devā brahmakāyikā, santi devā tatuttari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are the Gods of the Four Great Kings, the Gods of the Thirty-Three, the Gods of Yama, the Joyful Gods, the Gods Who Love to Create, the Gods Who Control the Creations of Others, the Gods of Brahmā’s Host, and gods even higher than these. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpāya saddhāya samannāgatā tā devatā ito cutā tattha upapannā, mayhampi tathārūpā saddhā saṃvijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When those deities passed away from here, they were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpena sīlena samannāgatā tā devatā ito cutā tattha upapannā, mayhampi tathārūpaṃ sīlaṃ saṃvijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpena sutena samannāgatā tā devatā ito cutā tattha upapannā, mayhampi tathārūpaṃ sutaṃ saṃvijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpena cāgena samannāgatā tā devatā ito cutā tattha upapannā, mayhampi tathārūpo cāgo saṃvijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathārūpāya paññāya samannāgatā tā devatā ito cutā tattha upapannā, mayhampi tathārūpā paññā saṃvijjatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ, mahānāma, samaye ariyasāvako attano ca tāsañca devatānaṃ saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarati nevassa tasmiṃ samaye rāgapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na dosapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti, na mohapariyuṭṭhitaṃ cittaṃ hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple recollects the faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and the deities their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ujugatamevassa tasmiṃ samaye cittaṃ hoti tā devatā ārabbha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time their mind is unswerving, based on the deities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujugatacitto kho pana, mahānāma, ariyasāvako labhati atthavedaṃ, labhati dhammavedaṃ, labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds joy in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vediyati, sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’re joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, you feel bliss. And when you’re blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, mahānāma: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ariyasāvako visamagatāya pajāya samappatto viharati, sabyāpajjāya pajāya abyāpajjo viharati, dhammasotaṃ samāpanno devatānussatiṃ bhāveti’. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the deities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so, mahānāma, ariyasāvako āgataphalo viññātasāsano, so iminā vihārena bahulaṃ viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood the instructions this is the kind of meditation they frequently practice.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhuneyyavaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve āhuneyyā indriya, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">balāni tayo ājānīyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuttariya anussatī, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahānāmena te dasāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
