<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.074-74. Dutiyatajjhānasutta  - 74. First Absorption (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.074. 74. Dutiyatajjhānasutta  - 74. First Absorption (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Devatāvagga  - 7. A God </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme appahāya abhabbo paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can’t enter and remain in the first absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmavitakkaṃ, byāpādavitakkaṃ, vihiṃsāvitakkaṃ, kāmasaññaṃ, byāpādasaññaṃ, vihiṃsāsaññaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts and perceptions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme appahāya abhabbo paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without giving up these six qualities you can’t enter and remain in the first absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme pahāya bhabbo paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But after giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmavitakkaṃ, byāpādavitakkaṃ, vihiṃsāvitakkaṃ, kāmasaññaṃ, byāpādasaññaṃ, vihiṃsāsaññaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts and perceptions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme pahāya bhabbo paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devatāvaggo sattamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgāmi arahaṃ mittā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgaṇikārāmadevatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhisakkhibhabbaṃ balaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tajjhānā apare duveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
