<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.053-53. Appamādasutta  - 53. Diligence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.053. 53. Appamādasutta  - 53. Diligence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Dhammikavagga  - 5. About Dhammika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi nu kho, bho gotama, eko dhammo bhāvito bahulīkato yo ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ, yo ca attho samparāyiko”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated, secures benefits for both the present life and lives to come?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi kho, brāhmaṇa, eko dhammo bhāvito bahulīkato yo ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ, yo ca attho samparāyiko”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, brahmin.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo pana, bho gotama, eko dhammo bhāvito bahulīkato yo ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ, yo ca attho samparāyiko”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So what is it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appamādo kho, brāhmaṇa, eko dhammo bhāvito bahulīkato ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ, yo ca attho samparāyiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Diligence, brahmin, is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, secures benefits for both the present life and lives to come. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, brāhmaṇa, yāni kānici jaṅgalānaṃ pāṇānaṃ padajātāni, sabbāni tāni hatthipade samodhānaṃ gacchanti; hatthipadaṃ tesaṃ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṃ mahantattena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant’s footprint. So an elephant’s footprint is said to be the biggest of them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, appamādo eko dhammo bhāvito bahulīkato ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ, yo ca attho samparāyiko. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, diligence is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, secures benefits for both the present life and lives to come. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, brāhmaṇa, kūṭāgārassa yā kāci gopānasiyo sabbā tā kūṭaṅgamā kūṭaninnā kūṭasamosaraṇā, kūṭaṃ tāsaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa … pe …. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, diligence is one thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, brāhmaṇa, pabbajalāyako pabbajaṃ lāyitvā agge gahetvā odhunāti nidhunāti nicchādeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A reed-cutter, having cut the reeds, grabs them at the top and shakes them down, shakes them about, and shakes them off. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa … pe …. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, diligence is one thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, brāhmaṇa, ambapiṇḍiyā vaṇṭacchinnāya yāni kānici ambāni vaṇṭūpanibandhanāni sabbāni tāni tadanvayāni bhavanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the stalk of a bunch of mangoes is cut, all the mangoes attached to the stalk will follow along. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa … pe …. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, diligence is one thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, brāhmaṇa, ye keci khuddarājāno sabbete rañño cakkavattissa anuyantā bhavanti, rājā tesaṃ cakkavattī aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">All lesser rulers are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa … pe …. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, diligence is one thing … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, brāhmaṇa, yā kāci tārakarūpānaṃ pabhā sabbā tā candassa pabhāya kalaṃ nāgghanti soḷasiṃ, candappabhā tāsaṃ aggamakkhāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the moon’s radiance, so the moon’s radiance is said to be the best of them all. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, appamādo eko dhammo bhāvito bahulīkato ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ yo ca attho samparāyiko. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, diligence is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, secures benefits for both the present life and lives to come. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, eko dhammo bhāvito bahulīkato ubho atthe samadhiggayha tiṭṭhati—diṭṭhadhammikañceva atthaṃ, yo ca attho samparāyiko”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, secures benefits for both the present life and lives to come.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
