<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.057-57. Chaḷabhijātisutta  - 57. The Six Classes of Rebirth </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.057. 57. Chaḷabhijātisutta  - 57. The Six Classes of Rebirth </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Mahāvagga  - 6. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pūraṇena, bhante, kassapena chaḷabhijātiyo paññattā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa describes six classes of rebirth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṇhābhijāti paññattā, nīlābhijāti paññattā, lohitābhijāti paññattā, haliddābhijāti paññattā, sukkābhijāti paññattā, paramasukkābhijāti paññattā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">black, blue, red, yellow, white, and ultimate white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ, bhante, pūraṇena kassapena kaṇhābhijāti paññattā, orabbhikā sūkarikā sākuṇikā māgavikā luddā macchaghātakā corā coraghātakā bandhanāgārikā ye vā panaññepi keci kurūrakammantā. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The black class of rebirth consists of slaughterers of sheep, pigs, poultry, or deer, hunters or fishers, bandits, executioners, butchers of cattle, jailers, and any others with a cruel livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ, bhante, pūraṇena kassapena nīlābhijāti paññattā, bhikkhū kaṇṭakavuttikā ye vā panaññepi keci kammavādā kriyavādā. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The blue class of rebirth consists of mendicants who live on thorns, and any others who teach the efficacy of deeds and action. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ, bhante, pūraṇena kassapena lohitābhijāti paññattā, nigaṇṭhā ekasāṭakā. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The red class of rebirth consists of the Jain ascetics who wear one cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ, bhante, pūraṇena kassapena haliddābhijāti paññattā, gihī odātavasanā acelakasāvakā. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The yellow class of rebirth consists of the lay people dressed in white who are disciples of the naked ascetics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ, bhante, pūraṇena kassapena sukkābhijāti paññattā, ājīvakā ājīvakiniyo. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The white class of rebirth consists of male and female <i>Ājīvaka</i> ascetics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatridaṃ, bhante, pūraṇena kassapena paramasukkābhijāti paññattā, nando vaccho kiso saṅkicco makkhali gosālo. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And the ultimate white class of rebirth consists of Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Saṅkicca, and Makkhali Gosāla. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pūraṇena, bhante, kassapena imā chaḷabhijātiyo paññattā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the six classes of rebirth that Pūraṇa Kassapa describes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ panānanda, pūraṇassa kassapassa sabbo loko etadabbhanujānāti imā chaḷabhijātiyo paññāpetun”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Ānanda, did the whole world authorize Pūraṇa Kassapa to describe these six classes of rebirth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, ānanda, puriso daliddo assako anāḷhiko, tassa akāmakassa bilaṃ olaggeyyuṃ: ‘idaṃ te, ambho purisa, maṃsañca khāditabbaṃ, mūlañca anuppadātabban’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s as if they were to force a steak on a poor, penniless person, telling them they must eat it and then pay for it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, ānanda, pūraṇena kassapena appaṭiññāya etesaṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ imā chaḷabhijātiyo paññattā, yathā taṃ bālena abyattena akhettaññunā akusalena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, Pūraṇa Kassapa has described these six classes of rebirth without the consent of those ascetics and brahmins. And he has done so in a foolish, incompetent, unskilled way, lacking common sense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ kho panānanda, chaḷabhijātiyo paññāpemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, however, also describe six classes of rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katamā cānanda, chaḷabhijātiyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And what, Ānanda, are the six classes of rebirth? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, ekacco kaṇhābhijātiyo samāno kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone born into a dark class gives rise to a dark result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panānanda, ekacco kaṇhābhijātiyo samāno sukkaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone born into a dark class gives rise to a bright result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panānanda, ekacco kaṇhābhijātiyo samāno akaṇhaṃ asukkaṃ nibbānaṃ abhijāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone born into a dark class gives rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panānanda, ekacco sukkābhijātiyo samāno kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone born into a bright class gives rise to a dark result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panānanda, ekacco sukkābhijātiyo samāno sukkaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone born into a bright class gives rise to a bright result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha panānanda, ekacco sukkābhijātiyo samāno akaṇhaṃ asukkaṃ nibbānaṃ abhijāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone born into a bright class gives rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, kaṇhābhijātiyo samāno kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does someone born into a dark class give rise to a dark result? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, ekacco nīce kule paccājāto hoti—caṇḍālakule vā nesādakule vā venakule vā rathakārakule vā pukkusakule vā, dalidde appannapānabhojane kasiravuttike, yattha kasirena ghāsacchādo labbhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone is reborn in a low family—a family of outcastes, bamboo-workers, hunters, chariot-makers, or waste-collectors—poor, with little to eat or drink, where life is tough, and food and shelter are hard to find. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca hoti dubbaṇṇo duddasiko okoṭimako bavhābādho kāṇo vā kuṇī vā khañjo vā pakkhahato vā, na lābhī annassa pānassa vatthassa yānassa mālāgandhavilepanassa seyyāvasathapadīpeyyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they’re ugly, unsightly, deformed, chronically ill—one-eyed, crippled, lame, or half-paralyzed. They don’t get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya duccaritaṃ caritvā, manasā duccaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, kaṇhābhijātiyo samāno kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone born into a dark class gives rise to a dark result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, kaṇhābhijātiyo samāno sukkaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does someone born into a dark class give rise to a bright result? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, ekacco nīce kule paccājāto hoti—caṇḍālakule vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when some person is reborn in a low family … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyāvasathapadīpeyyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena sucaritaṃ carati, vācāya sucaritaṃ carati, manasā sucaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they do good things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena sucaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya sucaritaṃ caritvā, manasā sucaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, kaṇhābhijātiyo samāno sukkaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone born into a dark class gives rise to a bright result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, kaṇhābhijātiyo samāno akaṇhaṃ asukkaṃ nibbānaṃ abhijāyati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does someone born into a dark class give rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, ekacco nīce kule paccājāto hoti—caṇḍālakule vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when some person is reborn in a low family … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so ca hoti dubbaṇṇo duddasiko okoṭimako. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They shave off their hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pabbajito samāno pañca nīvaraṇe pahāya cetaso upakkilese paññāya dubbalīkaraṇe, catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacitto, satta bojjhaṅge yathābhūtaṃ bhāvetvā akaṇhaṃ asukkaṃ nibbānaṃ abhijāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. They firmly establish their mind in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. They truly develop the seven awakening factors. And then they give rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, kaṇhābhijātiyo samāno akaṇhaṃ asukkaṃ nibbānaṃ abhijāyati. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone born in a dark class gives rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, sukkābhijātiyo samāno kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does someone born into a bright class give rise to a dark result? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, ekacco ucce kule paccājāto hoti—khattiyamahāsālakule vā brāhmaṇamahāsālakule vā gahapatimahāsālakule vā, aḍḍhe mahaddhane mahābhoge pahūtajātarūparajate pahūtavittūpakaraṇe pahūtadhanadhaññe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when some person is reborn in an eminent family—a well-to-do family of aristocrats, brahmins, or householders—rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property and assets, and lots of money and grain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca hoti abhirūpo dassanīyo pāsādiko paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgato, lābhī annassa pānassa vatthassa yānassa mālāgandhavilepanassa seyyāvasathapadīpeyyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they’re attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. They get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya duccaritaṃ caritvā, manasā duccaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, sukkābhijātiyo samāno kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone born into a bright class gives rise to a dark result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, sukkābhijātiyo samāno sukkaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does someone born into a bright class give rise to a bright result? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, ekacco ucce kule paccājāto hoti—khattiyamahāsālakule vā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when some person is reborn in an eminent family … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyāvasathapadīpeyyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena sucaritaṃ carati, vācāya sucaritaṃ carati, manasā sucaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they do good things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena sucaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya sucaritaṃ caritvā, manasā sucaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, sukkābhijātiyo samāno sukkaṃ dhammaṃ abhijāyati. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone born into a bright class give rise to a bright result. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañcānanda, sukkābhijātiyo samāno akaṇhaṃ asukkaṃ nibbānaṃ abhijāyati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does someone born into a bright class give rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, ekacco ucce kule paccājāto hoti—khattiyamahāsālakule vā brāhmaṇamahāsālakule vā gahapatimahāsālakule vā, aḍḍhe mahaddhane mahābhoge pahūtajātarūparajate pahūtavittūpakaraṇe pahūtadhanadhaññe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when some person is reborn in an eminent family … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ca hoti abhirūpo dassanīyo pāsādiko paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgato, lābhī annassa pānassa vatthassa yānassa mālāgandhavilepanassa seyyāvasathapadīpeyyassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They shave off their hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ pabbajito samāno pañca nīvaraṇe pahāya cetaso upakkilese paññāya dubbalīkaraṇe, catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacitto, satta bojjhaṅge yathābhūtaṃ bhāvetvā akaṇhaṃ asukkaṃ nibbānaṃ abhijāyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. They firmly establish their mind in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. They truly develop the seven awakening factors. And then they give rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, sukkābhijātiyo samāno akaṇhaṃ asukkaṃ nibbānaṃ abhijāyati. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how someone born into a bright class gives rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, ānanda, chaḷabhijātiyo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the six classes of rebirth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
