<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.039-39. Nidānasutta  - 39. Sources </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.039. 39. Nidānasutta  - 39. Sources </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lobho nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya, doso nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya, moho nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, lobhā alobho samudeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed doesn’t give rise to contentment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho, bhikkhave, lobhā lobhova samudeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, greed just gives rise to greed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, dosā adoso samudeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Hate doesn’t give rise to love. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho, bhikkhave, dosā dosova samudeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, hate just gives rise to hate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, mohā amoho samudeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Delusion doesn’t give rise to understanding. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho, bhikkhave, mohā mohova samudeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, delusion just gives rise to delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, lobhajena kammena dosajena kammena mohajena kammena devā paññāyanti, manussā paññāyanti, yā vā panaññāpi kāci sugatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not because of deeds born of greed, hate, and delusion that gods, humans, or those in any other good places are found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, lobhajena kammena dosajena kammena mohajena kammena nirayo paññāyati tiracchānayoni paññāyati pettivisayo paññāyati, yā vā panaññāpi kāci duggatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, it’s because of deeds born of greed, hate, and delusion that hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, or any other bad places are found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are three sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alobho nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya, adoso nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya, amoho nidānaṃ kammānaṃ samudayāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise to deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, alobhā lobho samudeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Contentment doesn’t give rise to greed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho, bhikkhave, alobhā alobhova samudeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, contentment just gives rise to contentment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, adosā doso samudeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Love doesn’t give rise to hate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho, bhikkhave, adosā adosova samudeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, love just gives rise to love. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, amohā moho samudeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Understanding doesn’t give rise to delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho, bhikkhave, amohā amohova samudeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, understanding just gives rise to understanding. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na, bhikkhave, alobhajena kammena adosajena kammena amohajena kammena nirayo paññāyati tiracchānayoni paññāyati pettivisayo paññāyati, yā vā panaññāpi kāci duggatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s not because of deeds born of contentment, love, and understanding that hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, or any other bad places are found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, alobhajena kammena adosajena kammena amohajena kammena devā paññāyanti, manussā paññāyanti, yā vā panaññāpi kāci sugatiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rather, it’s because of deeds born of contentment, love, and understanding that gods, humans, or those in any other good places are found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are three sources that give rise to deeds.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
