<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.075-75. Dukkhasutta  - 75. Suffering </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.075. 75. Dukkhasutta  - 75. Suffering </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Arahattavagga  - 8. Perfection </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme dukkhaṃ viharati savighātaṃ saupāyāsaṃ sapariḷāhaṃ, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā duggati pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a mendicant has six qualities they live unhappily in the present life—with distress, anguish, and fever—and when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmavitakkena, byāpādavitakkena, vihiṃsāvitakkena, kāmasaññāya, byāpādasaññāya, vihiṃsāsaññāya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts and perceptions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi, kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme dukkhaṃ viharati savighātaṃ saupāyāsaṃ sapariḷāhaṃ, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā duggati pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has these six qualities they live unhappily in the present life—with distress, anguish, and fever—and when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme sukhaṃ viharati avighātaṃ anupāyāsaṃ apariḷāhaṃ, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugati pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has six qualities they live happily in the present life—without distress, anguish, or fever—and when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhammavitakkena, abyāpādavitakkena, avihiṃsāvitakkena, nekkhammasaññāya, abyāpādasaññāya, avihiṃsāsaññāya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. And perceptions of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi, kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu diṭṭheva dhamme sukhaṃ viharati avighātaṃ anupāyāsaṃ apariḷāhaṃ, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugati pāṭikaṅkhā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has these six qualities they live happily in the present life—without distress, anguish, or fever—and when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
