<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.001-1. Paṭhamaāhuneyyasutta  - 1. Worthy of Offerings (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.001. 1. Paṭhamaāhuneyyasutta  - 1. Worthy of Offerings (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Āhuneyyavagga  - 1. Worthy of Offerings </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with six factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā neva sumano hoti na dummano, upekkhako viharati sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a mendicant who, when they see a sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotena saddaṃ sutvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear a sound with their ears … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they smell an odor with their nose … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they taste a flavor with their tongue … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they feel a touch with their body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manasā dhammaṃ viññāya neva sumano hoti na dummano, upekkhako viharati sato sampajāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they know a thought with their mind, they’re neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these six factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
