<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.051-51. Ānandasutta  - 51. With Ānanda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.051. 51. Ānandasutta  - 51. With Ānanda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Dhammikavagga  - 5. About Dhammika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, Ānanda sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu assutañceva dhammaṃ suṇāti, sutā cassa dhammā na sammosaṃ gacchanti, ye cassa dhammā pubbe cetasā samphuṭṭhapubbā te ca samudācaranti, aviññātañca vijānātī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, how does a mendicant get to hear a teaching they haven’t heard before? How do they remember those teachings they have heard? How do they keep rehearsing the teachings they’ve already got to know? And how do they come to understand what they haven’t understood before?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āyasmā kho ānando bahussuto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, Venerable Ānanda, you’re very learned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭibhātu āyasmantaṃyeva ānandan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why don’t you clarify this yourself?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tenahāvuso sāriputta, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Reverend Sāriputta, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmato ānandassa paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend,” Sāriputta replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ānando etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhāvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu dhammaṃ pariyāpuṇāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sāriputta, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ geyyaṃ veyyākaraṇaṃ gāthaṃ udānaṃ itivuttakaṃ jātakaṃ abbhutadhammaṃ vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena paresaṃ deseti, yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena paresaṃ vāceti, yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena sajjhāyaṃ karoti, yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ cetasā anuvitakketi anuvicāreti manasānupekkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, just as they learned and memorized it, they teach others in detail, make them recite in detail, practice reciting in detail, and think about and consider the teaching in their heart, examining it with the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmiṃ āvāse therā bhikkhū viharanti bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā tasmiṃ āvāse vassaṃ upeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They enter the rains retreat in a monastery with senior mendicants who are very learned, knowledgeable in the scriptures, who have memorized the teachings, the texts on monastic training, and the outlines. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te kālena kālaṃ upasaṅkamitvā paripucchati paripañhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">From time to time they go up to those mendicants and ask them questions: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ, bhante, kathaṃ; imassa kvattho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te tassa āyasmato avivaṭañceva vivaranti, anuttānīkatañca uttānīkaronti, anekavihitesu ca kaṅkhāṭhāniyesu dhammesu kaṅkhaṃ paṭivinodenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu assutañceva dhammaṃ suṇāti, sutā cassa dhammā na sammosaṃ gacchanti, ye cassa dhammā pubbe cetasā samphuṭṭhapubbā te ca samudācaranti, aviññātañca vijānātī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a mendicant gets to hear a teaching they haven’t heard before. It’s how they remember those teachings they have heard. It’s how they keep rehearsing the teachings they’ve already got to know. And it’s how they come to understand what they haven’t understood before.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, āvuso, abbhutaṃ, āvuso, yāva subhāsitañcidaṃ āyasmatā ānandena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, reverend, it’s amazing! How well said this was by Venerable Ānanda! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi ca mayaṃ chahi dhammehi samannāgataṃ āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ dhārema. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And we will remember Venerable Ānanda as someone who has these six qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā hi ānando dhammaṃ pariyāpuṇāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For Ānanda memorizes the teaching … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suttaṃ geyyaṃ veyyākaraṇaṃ gāthaṃ udānaṃ itivuttakaṃ jātakaṃ abbhutadhammaṃ vedallaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">statements, songs, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and classifications. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ānando yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena paresaṃ deseti, āyasmā ānando yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena paresaṃ vāceti, āyasmā ānando yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ vitthārena sajjhāyaṃ karoti, āyasmā ānando yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ cetasā anuvitakketi anuvicāreti manasānupekkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā ānando yasmiṃ āvāse therā bhikkhū viharanti bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā tasmiṃ āvāse vassaṃ upeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te āyasmā ānando kālena kālaṃ upasaṅkamitvā paripucchati paripañhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ, bhante, kathaṃ; imassa kvattho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te āyasmato ānandassa avivaṭañceva vivaranti, anuttānīkatañca uttānīkaronti, anekavihitesu ca kaṅkhāṭhāniyesu dhammesu kaṅkhaṃ paṭivinodentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those venerables clarify to Ānanda what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
