<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.047-47. Paṭhamasandiṭṭhikasutta  - 47. Visible in This Very Life (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.047. 47. Paṭhamasandiṭṭhikasutta  - 47. Visible in This Very Life (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Dhammikavagga  - 5. About Dhammika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho moḷiyasīvako paribbājako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then the wanderer Moliyasīvaka went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho moḷiyasīvako paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘sandiṭṭhiko dhammo, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo’ti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of ‘a teaching visible in this very life’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In what way is the teaching visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, sīvaka, taññevettha paṭipucchāmi. Yathā te khameyya tathā naṃ byākareyyāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Sīvaka, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sīvaka, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Sīvaka? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ lobhaṃ ‘atthi me ajjhattaṃ lobho’ti pajānāsi, asantaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ lobhaṃ ‘natthi me ajjhattaṃ lobho’ti pajānāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there’s greed in you, do you understand ‘I have greed in me’? And when there’s no greed in you, do you understand ‘I have no greed in me’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho tvaṃ, sīvaka, santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ lobhaṃ ‘atthi me ajjhattaṃ lobho’ti pajānāsi, asantaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ lobhaṃ ‘natthi me ajjhattaṃ lobho’ti pajānāsi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since you know this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi kho, sīvaka, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is how the teaching is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sīvaka, </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, Sīvaka? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ dosaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there’s hate … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ mohaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">delusion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ lobhadhammaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">greedy thoughts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ dosadhammaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">hateful thoughts … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ mohadhammaṃ ‘atthi me ajjhattaṃ mohadhammo’ti pajānāsi, asantaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ mohadhammaṃ ‘natthi me ajjhattaṃ mohadhammo’ti pajānāsī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">When there are delusional thoughts in you, do you understand ‘I have delusional thoughts in me’? And when there are no delusional thoughts in you, do you understand ‘I have no delusional thoughts in me’?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho tvaṃ, sīvaka, santaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ mohadhammaṃ ‘atthi me ajjhattaṃ mohadhammo’ti pajānāsi, asantaṃ vā ajjhattaṃ mohadhammaṃ ‘natthi me ajjhattaṃ mohadhammo’ti pajānāsi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since you know this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, sīvaka, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is how the teaching is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhikkantaṃ, bhante, abhikkantaṃ, bhante … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, sir! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ, bhante, bhagavā dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
