<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.056-56. Phaggunasutta  - 56. With Phagguṇa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.056. 56. Phaggunasutta  - 56. With Phagguṇa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Mahāvagga  - 6. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā phagguno ābādhiko hoti dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time Venerable Phagguṇa was sick, suffering, gravely ill. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āyasmā, bhante, phagguno ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, Venerable Phagguṇa is sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhante, bhagavā yenāyasmā phagguno tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, please go to Venerable Phagguṇa out of compassion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā phagguno tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to Venerable Phagguṇa. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho āyasmā phagguno bhagavantaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Phagguṇa saw the Buddha coming off in the distance </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and tried to rise on his cot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ phaggunaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alaṃ, phagguna, mā tvaṃ mañcake samadhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s all right, Phagguṇa, don’t get up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santimāni āsanāni parehi paññattāni, tatthāhaṃ nisīdissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are some seats spread out by others, I will sit there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdi bhagavā paññatte āsane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He sat on the seat spread out </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ phaggunaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and said to Venerable Phagguṇa: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kacci te, phagguna, khamanīyaṃ kacci yāpanīyaṃ? Kacci te dukkhā vedanā paṭikkamanti, no abhikkamanti; paṭikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no abhikkamo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Phagguṇa, I hope you’re keeping well; I hope you’re alright. And I hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ na yāpanīyaṃ. Bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā abhikkamanti, no paṭikkamanti; abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no paṭikkamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not alright. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, balavā puriso tiṇhena sikharena muddhani abhimattheyya; evamevaṃ kho me, bhante, adhimattā vātā muddhani ūhananti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The winds piercing my head are so severe, it feels like a strong man drilling into my head with a sharp point. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ na yāpanīyaṃ. Bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā abhikkamanti, no paṭikkamanti; abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no paṭikkamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m not keeping well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, balavā puriso daḷhena varattakkhaṇḍena sīsaveṭhanaṃ dadeyya; evamevaṃ kho me, bhante, adhimattā sīse sīsavedanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The pain in my head is so severe, it feels like a strong man tightening a tough leather strap around my head. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ na yāpanīyaṃ. Bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā abhikkamanti, no paṭikkamanti; abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no paṭikkamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m not keeping well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, dakkho goghātako vā goghātakantevāsī vā tiṇhena govikantanena kucchiṃ parikanteyya; evamevaṃ kho me, bhante, adhimattā vātā kucchiṃ parikantanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The winds piercing my belly are so severe, it feels like a deft butcher or their apprentice is slicing my belly open with a meat cleaver. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ na yāpanīyaṃ. Bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā abhikkamanti, no paṭikkamanti; abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no paṭikkamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m not keeping well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhante, dve balavanto purisā dubbalataraṃ purisaṃ nānābāhāsu gahetvā aṅgārakāsuyā santāpeyyuṃ samparitāpeyyuṃ; evamevaṃ kho me, bhante, adhimatto kāyasmiṃ ḍāho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The burning in my body is so severe, it feels like two strong men grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him on a pit of glowing coals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṃ na yāpanīyaṃ. Bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā abhikkamanti, no paṭikkamanti; abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati, no paṭikkamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m not keeping well, I’m not alright. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ phaggunaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassetvā samādapetvā samuttejetvā sampahaṃsetvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired Venerable Phagguṇa with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā phagguno acirapakkantassa bhagavato kālamakāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not long after the Buddha left, Venerable Phagguṇa passed away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamhi cassa samaye maraṇakāle indriyāni vippasīdiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the time of his death, his faculties were bright and clear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āyasmā, bhante, phagguno acirapakkantassa bhagavato kālamakāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, soon after the Buddha left, Venerable Phagguṇa died. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamhi cassa samaye maraṇakāle indriyāni vippasīdiṃsū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the time of his death, his faculties were bright and clear.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ hānanda, phaggunassa bhikkhuno indriyāni na vippasīdissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“And why shouldn’t his faculties be bright and clear? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phaggunassa, ānanda, bhikkhuno pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ avimuttaṃ ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The mendicant Phagguṇa’s mind was not freed from the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ dhammadesanaṃ sutvā pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ vimuttaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when he heard that teaching his mind was freed from them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chayime, ānanda, ānisaṃsā kālena dhammassavane kālena atthupaparikkhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ānanda, there are these six benefits to hearing the teaching at the right time and examining the meaning at the right time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhuno pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ avimuttaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, take the case of a mendicant whose mind is not freed from the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tamhi samaye maraṇakāle labhati tathāgataṃ dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the time of death they get to see the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa tathāgato dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One teaches them Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ dhammadesanaṃ sutvā pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear that teaching their mind is freed from the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, paṭhamo ānisaṃso kālena dhammassavane. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first benefit of listening to the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhuno pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ avimuttaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is not freed from the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tamhi samaye maraṇakāle na heva kho labhati tathāgataṃ dassanāya, api ca kho tathāgatasāvakaṃ labhati dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the time of death they don’t get to see the Realized One, but they get to see a Realized One’s disciple. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa tathāgatasāvako dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One’s disciple teaches them Dhamma … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ dhammadesanaṃ sutvā pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear that teaching their mind is freed from the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, dutiyo ānisaṃso kālena dhammassavane. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second benefit of listening to the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhuno pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ avimuttaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is not freed from the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tamhi samaye maraṇakāle na heva kho labhati tathāgataṃ dassanāya, napi tathāgatasāvakaṃ labhati dassanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the time of death they don’t get to see the Realized One, or to see a Realized One’s disciple. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ca kho yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ cetasā anuvitakketi anuvicāreti manasānupekkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they think about and consider the teaching in their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ cetasā anuvitakkayato anuvicārayato manasānupekkhato pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so their mind is freed from the five lower fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, tatiyo ānisaṃso kālena atthupaparikkhāya. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third benefit of listening to the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhuno pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ vimuttaṃ hoti, anuttare ca kho upadhisaṅkhaye cittaṃ avimuttaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, take the case of a mendicant whose mind is freed from the five lower fetters, but not with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tamhi samaye maraṇakāle labhati tathāgataṃ dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the time of death they get to see the Realized One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa tathāgato dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ … pe … brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One teaches them Dhamma … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ dhammadesanaṃ sutvā anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye cittaṃ vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear that teaching their mind is freed with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, catuttho ānisaṃso kālena dhammassavane. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth benefit of listening to the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhuno pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ vimuttaṃ hoti, anuttare ca kho upadhisaṅkhaye cittaṃ avimuttaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is freed from the five lower fetters, but not with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tamhi samaye maraṇakāle na heva kho labhati tathāgataṃ dassanāya, api ca kho tathāgatasāvakaṃ labhati dassanāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the time of death they don’t get to see the Realized One, but they get to see a Realized One’s disciple. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa tathāgatasāvako dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ … pe … parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One’s disciple teaches them Dhamma … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa taṃ dhammadesanaṃ sutvā anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye cittaṃ vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they hear that teaching their mind is freed with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, pañcamo ānisaṃso kālena dhammassavane. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth benefit of listening to the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, bhikkhuno pañcahi orambhāgiyehi saṃyojanehi cittaṃ vimuttaṃ hoti, anuttare ca kho upadhisaṅkhaye cittaṃ avimuttaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is freed from the five lower fetters, but not with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tamhi samaye maraṇakāle na heva kho labhati tathāgataṃ dassanāya, napi tathāgatasāvakaṃ labhati dassanāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">At the time of death they don’t get to see the Realized One, or to see a Realized One’s disciple. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ca kho yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ cetasā anuvitakketi anuvicāreti manasānupekkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they think about and consider the teaching in their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa yathāsutaṃ yathāpariyattaṃ dhammaṃ cetasā anuvitakkayato anuvicārayato manasānupekkhato anuttare upadhisaṅkhaye cittaṃ vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As they do so their mind is freed with the supreme ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, chaṭṭho ānisaṃso kālena atthupaparikkhāya. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the sixth benefit of listening to the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, ānanda, cha ānisaṃsā kālena dhammassavane kālena atthupaparikkhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the six benefits to hearing the teaching at the right time and examining the meaning at the right time.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
