<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.105-105. Bhavasutta  - 105. States of Existence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.105. 105. Bhavasutta  - 105. States of Existence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Ānisaṃsavagga  - 10. Benefit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, bhavā pahātabbā, tīsu sikkhāsu sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you should give up these three states of existence. And you should train in three trainings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo bhavā pahātabbā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the three states of existence you should give up? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmabhavo, rūpabhavo, arūpabhavo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Existence in the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, and the formless realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime tayo bhavā pahātabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three states of existence you should give up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāsu tīsu sikkhāsu sikkhitabbaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the three trainings you should train in? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhisīlasikkhāya, adhicittasikkhāya, adhipaññāsikkhāya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imāsu tīsu sikkhāsu sikkhitabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three trainings you should train in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno ime tayo bhavā pahīnā honti, imāsu ca tīsu sikkhāsu sikkhitasikkho hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When a mendicant has given up these three states of existence and has trained in these three trainings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu acchecchi taṇhaṃ, vivattayi saṃyojanaṃ, sammā mānābhisamayā antamakāsi dukkhassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re called a mendicant who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
