<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.043-43. Nāgasutta  - 43. The Giant </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.043. 43. Nāgasutta  - 43. The Giant </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Dhammikavagga  - 5. About Dhammika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after the meal, on his return from alms-round, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āyāmānanda, yena pubbārāmo migāramātupāsādo tenupasaṅkamissāma divāvihārāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Ānanda, let’s go to the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother for the day’s meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmatā ānandena saddhiṃ yena pubbārāmo migāramātupāsādo tenupasaṅkami. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the Eastern Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the late afternoon the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed Ānanda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āyāmānanda, yena pubbakoṭṭhako tenupasaṅkamissāma gattāni parisiñcitun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Ānanda, let’s go to the eastern gate to bathe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmatā ānandena saddhiṃ yena pubbakoṭṭhako tenupasaṅkami gattāni parisiñcituṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the eastern gate to bathe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbakoṭṭhake gattāni parisiñcitvā paccuttaritvā ekacīvaro aṭṭhāsi gattāni pubbāpayamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he had bathed and emerged from the water he stood in one robe drying himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rañño pasenadissa kosalassa seto nāma nāgo mahātūriyatāḷitavāditena pubbakoṭṭhakā paccuttarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, at that time King Pasenadi had a giant bull elephant called “White”. It emerged from the eastern gate to the beating and playing of musical instruments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apissu taṃ jano disvā evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When people saw it they said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“abhirūpo vata bho rañño nāgo; dassanīyo vata bho rañño nāgo; pāsādiko vata, bho, rañño nāgo, kāyupapanno vata bho rañño nāgo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The royal giant is so handsome! The royal giant is so good-looking! The royal giant is so lovely! The royal giant has such a huge body!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, āyasmā udāyī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they said this, Venerable Udāyī said to the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“hatthimeva nu kho, bhante, mahantaṃ brahantaṃ kāyupapannaṃ jano disvā evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, is it only when they see elephants with such a huge, formidable body that people say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāgo vata bho nāgo’ti, udāhu aññampi kañci mahantaṃ brahantaṃ kāyupapannaṃ jano disvā evamāha: ‘nāgo vata bho nāgo’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A giant, such a giant’? Or do they say it when they see any other creatures with huge, formidable bodies?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Hatthimpi kho, udāyi, mahantaṃ brahantaṃ kāyupapannaṃ jano disvā evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Udāyī, when they see elephants with such a huge, formidable body people say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāgo vata bho nāgo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A giant, such a giant!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assampi kho, udāyi, mahantaṃ brahantaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And also when they see a horse with a huge, formidable body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">goṇampi kho, udāyi, mahantaṃ brahantaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they see a bull with a huge, formidable body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uragampi kho, udāyi, mahantaṃ brahantaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they see a snake with a huge, formidable body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rukkhampi kho, udāyi, mahantaṃ brahantaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they see a tree with a huge, formidable body … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussampi kho, udāyi, mahantaṃ brahantaṃ kāyupapannaṃ jano disvā evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when they see a human being with such a huge, formidable body people say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nāgo vata, bho, nāgo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A giant, such a giant!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api ca, udāyi, yo sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya āguṃ na karoti kāyena vācāya manasā, tamahaṃ ‘nāgo’ti brūmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But Udāyī, one who does nothing monstrous by way of body, speech, and mind is who I call a ‘giant’ in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāva subhāsitañcidaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">How well said this was by the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ca, udāyi, yo sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya āguṃ na karoti kāyena vācāya manasā, tamahaṃ ‘nāgo’ti brūmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘But Udāyī, one who does nothing monstrous by way of body, speech, and mind is who I call a “giant” in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idañca panāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā subhāsitaṃ imāhi gāthāhi anumodāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And I celebrate the well-spoken words of the Buddha with these verses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussabhūtaṃ sambuddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Awakened as a human being, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attadantaṃ samāhitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">self-tamed and immersed in samādhi, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iriyamānaṃ brahmapathe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">following the spiritual path, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cittassūpasame rataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he loves peace of mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ manussā namassanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Revered by people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbadhammāna pāraguṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">gone beyond all things, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devāpi taṃ namassanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">even the gods revere him; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iti me arahato sutaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so I’ve heard from the perfected one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbasaṃyojanātītaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has transcended all fetters </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vanā nibbanamāgataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and escaped from entanglements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmehi nekkhammarataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Delighting to renounce sensual pleasures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muttaṃ selāva kañcanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’s freed like gold from stone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe accarucī nāgo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That giant outshines all, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">himavāññe siluccaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">like the Himalaya beside other mountains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbesaṃ nāganāmānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Of all those named ‘giant’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saccanāmo anuttaro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he is truly named, supreme. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāgaṃ vo kittayissāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll extol the giant for you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na hi āguṃ karoti so; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for he does nothing monstrous. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Soraccaṃ avihiṃsā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gentleness and harmlessness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pādā nāgassa te duve. </span></p>
<p class="p3">are two feet of the giant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tapo ca brahmacariyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Austerity and celibacy </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">caraṇā nāgassa tyāpare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">are his two other feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhāhattho mahānāgo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Faith is the giant’s trunk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhāsetadantavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and equanimity his white tusks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sati gīvā siro paññā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mindfulness is his neck, his head is wisdom—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīmaṃsā dhammacintanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">inquiry and thinking about principles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakucchisamātapo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">His belly is the sacred hearth of the Dhamma, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viveko tassa vāladhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and his tail is seclusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So jhāyī assāsarato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Practicing absorption, enjoying the breath, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhattaṃ susamāhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he is serene within. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gacchaṃ samāhito nāgo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The giant is serene when walking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhito nāgo samāhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the giant is serene when standing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyaṃ samāhito nāgo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the giant is serene when lying down, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nisinnopi samāhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and when sitting, the giant is serene. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbattha saṃvuto nāgo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The giant is restrained everywhere: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">esā nāgassa sampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the accomplishment of the giant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhuñjati anavajjāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He eats blameless things, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvajjāni na bhuñjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he doesn’t eat blameworthy things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ghāsamacchādanaṃ laddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets food and clothes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sannidhiṃ parivajjayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he avoids storing them up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṃyojanaṃ aṇuṃ thūlaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having severed all bonds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbaṃ chetvāna bandhanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">fetters large and small, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena yeneva gacchati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever he goes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anapekkhova gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he goes without concern. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāpi udake jātaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A white lotus, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puṇḍarīkaṃ pavaḍḍhati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">fragrant and delightful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nupalippati toyena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">sprouts in water and grows there, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sucigandhaṃ manoramaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but the water doesn’t cling to it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatheva loke sujāto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just so the Buddha is born in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho loke viharati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and lives in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nupalippati lokena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">but the world doesn’t stick to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">toyena padumaṃ yathā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as the water does not stick to the lotus. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāginīva jalito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A great blazing fire </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāhārūpasammati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">dies down when the fuel runs out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhāresūpasantesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the coals have gone out </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nibbutoti pavuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s said to be ‘extinguished’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthassāyaṃ viññāpanī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This simile is taught by the discerning </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upamā viññūhi desitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to express the meaning clearly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññassanti mahānāgā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Great giants will understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāgaṃ nāgena desitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what the giant taught the giant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vītarāgo vītadoso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Free of greed, free of hate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vītamoho anāsavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">free of delusion, undefiled; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sarīraṃ vijahaṃ nāgo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the giant, giving up his body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbissati anāsavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">will become extinguished without defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
