<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.038-38. Attakārīsutta  - 38. One’s Own Volition </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.038. 38. Attakārīsutta  - 38. One’s Own Volition </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahañhi, bho gotama, evaṃvādī evaṃdiṭṭhi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, this is my doctrine and view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi attakāro, natthi parakāro’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One does not act of one’s own volition, nor does one act of another’s volition.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Māhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, evaṃvādiṃ evaṃdiṭṭhiṃ addasaṃ vā assosiṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, brahmin, I’ve never seen or heard of anyone holding such a doctrine or view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma sayaṃ abhikkamanto, sayaṃ paṭikkamanto evaṃ vakkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">How on earth can someone who comes and goes on his own say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi attakāro, natthi parakāro’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one does not act of one’s own volition, nor does one act of another’s volition? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, brāhmaṇa, atthi ārabbhadhātū”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, brahmin, is there an element of initiative?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ārabbhadhātuyā sati ārabbhavanto sattā paññāyantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since this is so, do we find sentient beings who initiate activity?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, ārabbhadhātuyā sati ārabbhavanto sattā paññāyanti, ayaṃ sattānaṃ attakāro ayaṃ parakāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since there is an element of initiative, and sentient beings who initiate activity are found, sentient beings act of their own volition or that of another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, brāhmaṇa, atthi nikkamadhātu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">What do you think, brahmin, is there an element of persistence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi parakkamadhātu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">exertion … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi thāmadhātu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">strength … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi ṭhitidhātu … </span></p>
<p class="p3">persistence … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthi upakkamadhātū”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">energy?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Upakkamadhātuyā sati upakkamavanto sattā paññāyantī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since this is so, do we find sentient beings who have energy?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, upakkamadhātuyā sati upakkamavanto sattā paññāyanti, ayaṃ sattānaṃ attakāro ayaṃ parakāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since there is an element of energy, and sentient beings who have energy are found, sentient beings act of their own volition or that of another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, evaṃvādiṃ evaṃdiṭṭhiṃ addasaṃ vā assosiṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well, brahmin, I’ve never seen or heard of anyone holding such a doctrine or view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma sayaṃ abhikkamanto sayaṃ paṭikkamanto evaṃ vakkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">How on earth can someone who comes and goes on his own say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi attakāro natthi parakāro’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">one does not act of one’s own volition, nor does one act of another’s volition?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
