<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.068-68. Saṅgaṇikārāmasutta  - 68. Enjoying Company </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.068. 68. Saṅgaṇikārāmasutta  - 68. Enjoying Company </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Devatāvagga  - 7. A God </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘So vata, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saṅgaṇikārāmo saṅgaṇikarato saṅgaṇikārāmataṃ anuyutto, gaṇārāmo gaṇarato gaṇārāmataṃ anuyutto, eko paviveke abhiramissatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, it’s totally impossible that a mendicant who enjoys company and groups, who loves them and likes to enjoy them, should take pleasure in being alone in seclusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Eko paviveke anabhiramanto cittassa nimittaṃ gahessatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without taking pleasure in being alone in seclusion, it’s impossible to learn the patterns of the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Cittassa nimittaṃ agaṇhanto sammādiṭṭhiṃ paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without learning the patterns of the mind, it’s impossible to fulfill right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sammādiṭṭhiṃ aparipūretvā sammāsamādhiṃ paripūressatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without fulfilling right view, it’s impossible to fulfill right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sammāsamādhiṃ aparipūretvā saṃyojanāni pajahissatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without fulfilling right immersion, it’s impossible to give up the fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saṃyojanāni appahāya nibbānaṃ sacchikarissatī’ti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without giving up the fetters, it’s impossible to realize extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘So vata, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na saṅgaṇikārāmo na saṅgaṇikarato na saṅgaṇikārāmataṃ anuyutto, na gaṇārāmo na gaṇarato na gaṇārāmataṃ anuyutto, eko paviveke abhiramissatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s totally possible that a mendicant who doesn’t enjoy company and groups, who doesn’t love them and like to enjoy them, should take pleasure in being alone in seclusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Eko paviveke abhiramanto cittassa nimittaṃ gahessatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who takes pleasure in being alone in seclusion, it’s possible to learn the patterns of the mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Cittassa nimittaṃ gaṇhanto sammādiṭṭhiṃ paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For someone who learns the patterns of the mind, it’s possible to fulfill right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sammādiṭṭhiṃ paripūretvā sammāsamādhiṃ paripūressatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having fulfilled right view, it’s possible to fulfill right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sammāsamādhiṃ paripūretvā saṃyojanāni pajahissatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having fulfilled right immersion, it’s possible to give up the fetters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saṃyojanāni pahāya nibbānaṃ sacchikarissatī’ti ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having given up the fetters, it’s possible to realize extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
