<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.087-87. Voropitasutta  - 87. A Murderer </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.087. 87. Voropitasutta  - 87. A Murderer </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sītivagga  - 9. Coolness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato suṇantopi saddhammaṃ abhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātā jīvitā voropitā hoti, pitā jīvitā voropito hoti, arahaṃ jīvitā voropito hoti, tathāgatassa duṭṭhena cittena lohitaṃ uppāditaṃ hoti, saṃgho bhinno hoti, duppañño hoti jaḷo eḷamūgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They murder their mother or father or a perfected one. They maliciously shed the blood of a Realized One. They cause a schism in the Saṅgha. They’re witless, dull, and stupid. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato suṇantopi saddhammaṃ abhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato suṇanto saddhammaṃ bhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi chahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na mātā jīvitā voropitā hoti, na pitā jīvitā voropito hoti, na arahaṃ jīvitā voropito hoti, na tathāgatassa duṭṭhena cittena lohitaṃ uppāditaṃ hoti, na saṅgho bhinno hoti, paññavā hoti ajaḷo aneḷamūgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t murder their mother or father or a perfected one. They don’t maliciously shed the blood of a Realized One. They don’t cause a schism in the Saṅgha. They’re wise, bright, and clever. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, chahi dhammehi samannāgato suṇanto saddhammaṃ bhabbo niyāmaṃ okkamituṃ kusalesu dhammesu sammattan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone with these six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
