<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.045-45. Iṇasutta  - 45. Debt </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.045. 45. Iṇasutta  - 45. Debt </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Dhammikavagga  - 5. About Dhammika </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dāliddiyaṃ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, isn’t poverty suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual pleasures?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, daliddo assako anāḷhiko iṇaṃ ādiyati, iṇādānampi, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a poor, penniless person falls into debt, isn’t being in debt also suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual pleasures?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, daliddo assako anāḷhiko iṇaṃ ādiyitvā vaḍḍhiṃ paṭissuṇāti, vaḍḍhipi, bhikkhave, dukkhā lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a poor person who has fallen into debt agrees to pay interest, isn’t the interest also suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual pleasures?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, daliddo assako anāḷhiko vaḍḍhiṃ paṭissuṇitvā kālābhataṃ vaḍḍhiṃ na deti, codentipi naṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a poor person who has fallen into debt and agreed to pay interest fails to pay it when it falls due, they get a warning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">codanāpi, bhikkhave, dukkhā lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t being warned suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual pleasures?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, daliddo assako anāḷhiko codiyamāno na deti, anucarantipi naṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a poor person fails to pay after getting a warning, they’re prosecuted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anucariyāpi, bhikkhave, dukkhā lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t being prosecuted suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual pleasures?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, daliddo assako anāḷhiko anucariyamāno na deti, bandhantipi naṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a poor person fails to pay after being prosecuted, they’re imprisoned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bandhanampi, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Isn’t being imprisoned suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual pleasures?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iti kho, bhikkhave, dāliddiyampi dukkhaṃ lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino, iṇādānampi dukkhaṃ lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino, vaḍḍhipi dukkhā lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino, codanāpi dukkhā lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino, anucariyāpi dukkhā lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino, bandhanampi dukkhaṃ lokasmiṃ kāmabhogino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So mendicants, poverty, debt, interest, warnings, prosecution, and imprisonment are suffering in the world for those who enjoy sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yassa kassaci saddhā natthi kusalesu dhammesu, hirī natthi kusalesu dhammesu, ottappaṃ natthi kusalesu dhammesu, vīriyaṃ natthi kusalesu dhammesu, paññā natthi kusalesu dhammesu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyassa vinaye daliddo assako anāḷhiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is called poor and penniless in the training of the noble one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kho so, bhikkhave, daliddo assako anāḷhiko saddhāya asati kusalesu dhammesu, hiriyā asati kusalesu dhammesu, ottappe asati kusalesu dhammesu, vīriye asati kusalesu dhammesu, paññāya asati kusalesu dhammesu, kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since they have no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, or wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities, they do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa iṇādānasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re in debt, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kāyaduccaritassa paṭicchādanahetu pāpikaṃ icchaṃ paṇidahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In order to conceal the bad things they do by way of body, speech, and mind they harbour corrupt wishes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Mā maṃ jaññū’ti icchati, ‘mā maṃ jaññū’ti saṅkappati, ‘mā maṃ jaññū’ti vācaṃ bhāsati, ‘mā maṃ jaññū’ti kāyena parakkamati. So tassa vacīduccaritassa paṭicchādanahetu … pe … so tassa manoduccaritassa paṭicchādanahetu … pe … ‘mā maṃ jaññū’ti kāyena parakkamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They wish, plan, speak, and act with the thought: ‘May no-one find me out!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa vaḍḍhiyā vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they pay interest, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ pesalā sabrahmacārī evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good-hearted spiritual companions say this about them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayañca so āyasmā evaṅkārī evaṃsamācāro’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This venerable acts like this, and behaves like that.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa codanāya vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re warned, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ araññagataṃ vā rukkhamūlagataṃ vā suññāgāragataṃ vā vippaṭisārasahagatā pāpakā akusalavitakkā samudācaranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they go to a wilderness, the root of a tree, or an empty hut, they’re beset by remorseful, unskillful thoughts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa anucariyāya vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re prosecuted, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa kho so, bhikkhave, daliddo assako anāḷhiko kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā vācāya duccaritaṃ caritvā manasā duccaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā nirayabandhane vā bajjhati tiracchānayonibandhane vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That poor, penniless person has done bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re trapped in the prison of hell or the animal realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekabandhanampi samanupassāmi evaṃdāruṇaṃ evaṃkaṭukaṃ evaṃantarāyakaraṃ anuttarassa yogakkhemassa adhigamāya, yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, nirayabandhanaṃ vā tiracchānayonibandhanaṃ vāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t see a single prison that’s as brutal, as vicious, and such an obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary as the prison of hell or the animal realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dāliddiyaṃ dukkhaṃ loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Poverty is said to be suffering in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iṇādānañca vuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and so is being in debt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daliddo iṇamādāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A poor person who has fallen in debt </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhuñjamāno vihaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">worries even when spending the loan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato anucaranti naṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then they’re prosecuted, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bandhanampi nigacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or even thrown in jail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañhi bandhanaṃ dukkhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such imprisonment is true suffering </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmalābhābhijappinaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for someone who prays for pleasure and possessions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatheva ariyavinaye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, in the noble one’s training </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhā yassa na vijjati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever has no faith, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahirīko anottappī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">no conscience or prudence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāpakammavinibbayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">contemplates bad deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyaduccaritaṃ katvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After doing bad things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vacīduccaritāni ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by way of body, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manoduccaritaṃ katvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">speech, and mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā maṃ jaññū’ti icchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they wish, ‘May no-one find me out!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saṃsappati kāyena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their behavior is creepy </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vācāya uda cetasā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">by body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāpakammaṃ pavaḍḍhento, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They pile up bad deeds </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha tattha punappunaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">on and on, life after life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pāpakammo dummedho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That stupid evildoer, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jānaṃ dukkaṭamattano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowing their own misdeeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daliddo iṇamādāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is a poor person who has fallen in debt, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhuñjamāno vihaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and worries even when spending the loan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato anucaranti naṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when in village or wilderness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅkappā mānasā dukhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re prosecuted </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gāme vā yadi vāraññe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">by painful mental plans, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa vippaṭisārajā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">which are born of remorse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So pāpakammo dummedho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That stupid evildoer, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jānaṃ dukkaṭamattano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowing their own misdeeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yonimaññataraṃ gantvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">goes to one of the animal realms, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niraye vāpi bajjhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or is trapped in hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañhi bandhanaṃ dukkhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such imprisonment is true suffering, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yamhā dhīro pamuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">from which a wise one is released. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaladdhehi bhogehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With confident heart, they give </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadaṃ cittaṃ pasādayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with wealth that is properly earned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhayattha kaṭaggāho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That faithful householder </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhassa gharamesino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wins both ways: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Diṭṭhadhammahitatthāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">welfare and benefit in this life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samparāyasukhāya ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and happiness in the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evametaṃ gahaṭṭhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how, for a householder, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cāgo puññaṃ pavaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">merit grows by generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatheva ariyavinaye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, in the noble one’s training, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhā yassa patiṭṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever is grounded in faith, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hirīmano ca ottappī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with conscience and prudence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paññavā sīlasaṃvuto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wise, and ethically restrained, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eso kho ariyavinaye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is said to live happily </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sukhajīvī’ti vuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the noble one’s training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirāmisaṃ sukhaṃ laddhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After gaining spiritual bliss, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upekkhaṃ adhitiṭṭhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they concentrate on equanimity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañca nīvaraṇe hitvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give up the five hindrances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niccaṃ āraddhavīriyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">constantly energetic, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jhānāni upasampajja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and enter the absorptions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekodi nipako sato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">unified, alert, and mindful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ ñatvā yathābhūtaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Truly knowing in this way </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbasaṃyojanakkhaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the end of all fetters, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso anupādāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">by not grasping in any way, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammā cittaṃ vimuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their mind is rightly freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sammā vimuttassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">To that poised one, rightly freed </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñāṇañce hoti tādino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with the end of the fetters of rebirth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Akuppā me vimuttī’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the knowledge comes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhavasaṃyojanakkhaye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My freedom is unshakable.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ kho paramaṃ ñāṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the ultimate knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etaṃ sukhamanuttaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the supreme happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asokaṃ virajaṃ khemaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sorrowless, stainless, secure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etaṃ ānaṇyamuttaman”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the highest freedom from debt.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
