<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.103-103. Ukkhittāsikasutta  - 103. With a Drawn Sword </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.103. 103. Ukkhittāsikasutta  - 103. With a Drawn Sword </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Ānisaṃsavagga  - 10. Benefit </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cha, bhikkhave, ānisaṃse sampassamānena alameva bhikkhunā sabbasaṅkhāresu anodhiṃ karitvā dukkhasaññaṃ upaṭṭhāpetuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of suffering in all conditions without qualification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sabbasaṅkhāresu ca me nibbidasaññā paccupaṭṭhitā bhavissati, seyyathāpi ukkhittāsike vadhake. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Perception of disillusionment will be established in me for all conditions, like a killer with a drawn sword.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbalokā ca me mano vuṭṭhahissati, nibbāne ca santadassāvī bhavissāmi, anusayā ca me samugghātaṃ gacchissanti, kiccakārī ca bhavissāmi, satthā ca me pariciṇṇo bhavissati mettāvatāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My mind will rise above the whole world.’ ‘I will see extinguishment as peaceful.’ ‘My underlying tendencies will be uprooted.’ ‘I will fulfill my duty.’ ‘I will have served my Teacher with love.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha ānisaṃse sampassamānena alameva bhikkhunā sabbasaṅkhāresu anodhiṃ karitvā dukkhasaññaṃ upaṭṭhāpetun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing these six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of suffering in all conditions without qualification.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
