<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.011-11. Paṭhamasāraṇīyasutta  - 11. Warm-hearted (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.011. 11. Paṭhamasāraṇīyasutta  - 11. Warm-hearted (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Sāraṇīyavagga  - 2. Warm-hearted </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Chayime, bhikkhave, dhammā sāraṇīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these six warm-hearted qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno mettaṃ kāyakammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi ceva raho ca, ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with bodily kindness, both in public and in private. This is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno mettaṃ vacīkammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi ceva raho ca, ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with verbal kindness, both in public and in private. This too is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno mettaṃ manokammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi ceva raho ca, ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with mental kindness … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te lābhā dhammikā dhammaladdhā antamaso pattapariyāpannamattampi tathārūpehi lābhehi appaṭivibhattabhogī hoti sīlavantehi sabrahmacārīhi sādhāraṇabhogī, ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material possessions they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions. This too is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yāni tāni sīlāni akhaṇḍāni acchiddāni asabalāni akammāsāni bhujissāni viññuppasatthāni aparāmaṭṭhāni samādhisaṃvattanikāni tathārūpehi sīlehi sīlasāmaññagato viharati sabrahmacārīhi āvi ceva raho ca, ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those precepts are unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This too is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yāyaṃ diṭṭhi ariyā niyyānikā niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāya tathārūpāya diṭṭhiyā diṭṭhisāmaññagato viharati sabrahmacārīhi āvi ceva raho ca, ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and leads one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering. This too is a warm-hearted quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhammā sāraṇīyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the six warm-hearted qualities.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
