<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.065-65. Anāgāmiphalasutta  - 65. The Fruit of Non-Return </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.065. 65. Anāgāmiphalasutta  - 65. The Fruit of Non-Return </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Devatāvagga  - 7. A God </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme appahāya abhabbo anāgāmiphalaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, without giving up six things you can’t realize the fruit of non-return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddhiyaṃ, ahirikaṃ, anottappaṃ, kosajjaṃ, muṭṭhassaccaṃ, duppaññataṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lack of faith, conscience, and prudence; laziness, unmindfulness, and witlessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme appahāya abhabbo anāgāmiphalaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without giving up these six things you can’t realize the fruit of non-return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme pahāya bhabbo anāgāmiphalaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up six things you can realize the fruit of non-return. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assaddhiyaṃ, ahirikaṃ, anottappaṃ, kosajjaṃ, muṭṭhassaccaṃ, duppaññataṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lack of faith, conscience, and prudence; laziness, unmindfulness, and witlessness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme pahāya bhabbo anāgāmiphalaṃ sacchikātun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up these six things you can realize the fruit of non-return.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
