<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.041-41. Dārukkhandhasutta  - 41. A Tree Trunk </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.041. 41. Dārukkhandhasutta  - 41. A Tree Trunk </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. devatāvagga  - 4. Deities </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ āyasmā sāriputto rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sambahulehi bhikkhūhi saddhiṃ gijjhakūṭā pabbatā orohanto addasa aññatarasmiṃ padese mahantaṃ dārukkhandhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, descended the Vulture’s Peak together with several mendicants. At a certain spot he saw a large tree trunk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“passatha no, āvuso, tumhe amuṃ mahantaṃ dārukkhandhan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverends, do you see this large tree trunk?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ākaṅkhamāno, āvuso, bhikkhu iddhimā cetovasippatto amuṃ dārukkhandhaṃ pathavītveva adhimucceyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If they wanted to, a mendicant with psychic powers who has mastered their mind could determine this tree trunk to be nothing but earth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, āvuso, amumhi dārukkhandhe pathavīdhātu, yaṃ nissāya bhikkhu iddhimā cetovasippatto amuṃ dārukkhandhaṃ pathavītveva adhimucceyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because the earth element exists in the tree trunk. Relying on that a mendicant with psychic powers could determine it to be nothing but earth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkhamāno, āvuso, bhikkhu iddhimā cetovasippatto amuṃ dārukkhandhaṃ āpotveva adhimucceyya … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wanted to, a mendicant with psychic powers who has mastered their mind could determine this tree trunk to be nothing but water. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tejotveva adhimucceyya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or they could determine it to be nothing but fire … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāyotveva adhimucceyya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or they could determine it to be nothing but air … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">subhantveva adhimucceyya … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or they could determine it to be nothing but beautiful … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asubhantveva adhimucceyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Or they could determine it to be nothing but ugly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, āvuso, amumhi dārukkhandhe asubhadhātu, yaṃ nissāya bhikkhu iddhimā cetovasippatto amuṃ dārukkhandhaṃ asubhantveva adhimucceyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because the element of ugliness exists in the tree trunk. Relying on that a mendicant with psychic powers could determine it to be nothing but ugly.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
