<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>6.089-89. Appahāyasutta  - 89. Not Giving Up </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">6.089. 89. Appahāyasutta  - 89. Not Giving Up </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sītivagga  - 9. Coolness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme appahāya abhabbo diṭṭhisampadaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, without giving up six things you can’t become accomplished in view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkāyadiṭṭhiṃ, vicikicchaṃ, sīlabbataparāmāsaṃ, apāyagamanīyaṃ rāgaṃ, apāyagamanīyaṃ dosaṃ, apāyagamanīyaṃ mohaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Identity view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that lead to rebirth in places of loss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme appahāya abhabbo diṭṭhisampadaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Without giving up these six things you can’t become accomplished in view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cha, bhikkhave, dhamme pahāya bhabbo diṭṭhisampadaṃ sacchikātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up six things you can become accomplished in view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame cha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What six? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakkāyadiṭṭhiṃ, vicikicchaṃ, sīlabbataparāmāsaṃ, apāyagamanīyaṃ rāgaṃ, apāyagamanīyaṃ dosaṃ, apāyagamanīyaṃ mohaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Identity view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that lead to rebirth in places of loss. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha dhamme pahāya bhabbo diṭṭhisampadaṃ sacchikātun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving up these six things you can become accomplished in view.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
