<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.078-78. Sīlabbatasutta  - 78. Precepts and Observances </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.078. 78. Sīlabbatasutta  - 78. Precepts and Observances </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Ānandavagga  - 8. Ānanda </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sabbaṃ nu kho, ānanda, sīlabbataṃ jīvitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ upaṭṭhānasāraṃ saphalan”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, are all precepts and observances, lifestyles, and spiritual paths fruitful when taken as the essence?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na khvettha, bhante, ekaṃsenā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is no simple matter, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hānanda, vibhajassū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, Ānanda, break it down.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yañhissa, bhante, sīlabbataṃ jīvitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ upaṭṭhānasāraṃ sevato akusalā dhammā abhivaḍḍhanti kusalā dhammā parihāyanti, evarūpaṃ sīlabbataṃ jīvitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ upaṭṭhānasāraṃ aphalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Take the case of someone who cultivates precepts and observances, a lifestyle, and a spiritual path, taking this as the essence. If unskillful qualities grow while skillful qualities decline, that’s not fruitful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañca khvāssa, bhante, sīlabbataṃ jīvitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ upaṭṭhānasāraṃ sevato akusalā dhammā parihāyanti, kusalā dhammā abhivaḍḍhanti, evarūpaṃ sīlabbataṃ jīvitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ upaṭṭhānasāraṃ saphalan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">However, if unskillful qualities decline while skillful qualities grow, that is fruitful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca āyasmā ānando. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what Ānanda said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanuñño satthā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teacher approved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando “samanuñño me satthā”ti, uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Ānanda, knowing that the teacher approved, got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā acirapakkante āyasmante ānande bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, not long after Ānanda had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sekho, bhikkhave, ānando; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, Ānanda is a trainee, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca panassa sulabharūpo samasamo paññāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but it’s not easy to find his equal in wisdom.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
