<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.039-39. Sukhumālasutta  - 39. A Delicate Lifestyle </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.039. 39. Sukhumālasutta  - 39. A Delicate Lifestyle </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Devadūtavagga  - 4. Messengers of the Gods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sukhumālo ahaṃ, bhikkhave, paramasukhumālo accantasukhumālo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“My lifestyle was delicate, mendicants, most delicate, extremely delicate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mama sudaṃ, bhikkhave, pitu nivesane pokkharaṇiyo kāritā honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In my father’s house, lotus ponds were made just for me. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekattha sudaṃ, bhikkhave, uppalaṃ vappati, ekattha padumaṃ, ekattha puṇḍarīkaṃ, yāvadeva mamatthāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In some, blue water lilies blossomed, while in others, there were pink or white lotuses, just for my benefit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho panassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, akāsikaṃ candanaṃ dhāremi. Kāsikaṃ, bhikkhave, su me taṃ veṭhanaṃ hoti, kāsikā kañcukā, kāsikaṃ nivāsanaṃ, kāsiko uttarāsaṅgo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I only used sandalwood from Kāsī, and my turbans, jackets, sarongs, and upper robes also came from Kāsī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattindivaṃ kho pana me su taṃ, bhikkhave, setacchattaṃ dhārīyati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a white parasol was held over me night and day, with the thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā naṃ phusi sītaṃ vā uṇhaṃ vā tiṇaṃ vā rajo vā ussāvo vā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Don’t let cold, heat, grass, dust, or damp bother him.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, tayo pāsādā ahesuṃ—eko hemantiko, eko gimhiko, eko vassiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I had three stilt longhouses—one for the winter, one for the summer, and one for the rainy season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho ahaṃ, bhikkhave, vassike pāsāde vassike cattāro māse nippurisehi tūriyehi paricārayamāno na heṭṭhāpāsādaṃ orohāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I stayed in a stilt longhouse without coming downstairs for the four months of the rainy season, where I was entertained by musicians—none of them men. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā kho pana, bhikkhave, aññesaṃ nivesane dāsakammakaraporisassa kaṇājakaṃ bhojanaṃ dīyati bilaṅgadutiyaṃ, evamevassu me, bhikkhave, pitu nivesane dāsakammakaraporisassa sālimaṃsodano dīyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While the bondservants, workers, and staff in other houses are given rough gruel with pickles to eat, in my father’s house they eat fine rice with meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, evarūpāya iddhiyā samannāgatassa evarūpena ca sukhumālena etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Amid such prosperity and such a delicate lifestyle, I thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘assutavā kho puthujjano attanā jarādhammo samāno jaraṃ anatīto paraṃ jiṇṇaṃ disvā aṭṭīyati harāyati jigucchati attānaṃyeva atisitvā, ahampi khomhi jarādhammo jaraṃ anatīto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When an uneducated ordinary person—who is liable to grow old, not being exempt from old age—sees someone else who is old, they’re horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are in the same situation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañceva kho pana jarādhammo samāno jaraṃ anatīto paraṃ jiṇṇaṃ disvā aṭṭīyeyyaṃ harāyeyyaṃ jiguccheyyaṃ na metaṃ assa patirūpan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since I, too, am liable to grow old, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when I see someone else who is old.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, iti paṭisañcikkhato yo yobbane yobbanamado so sabbaso pahīyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, I entirely gave up the vanity of youth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assutavā kho puthujjano attanā byādhidhammo samāno byādhiṃ anatīto paraṃ byādhitaṃ disvā aṭṭīyati harāyati jigucchati attānaṃyeva atisitvā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When an uneducated ordinary person—who is liable to get sick, not being exempt from sickness—sees someone else who is sick, they’re horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are in the same situation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahampi khomhi byādhidhammo byādhiṃ anatīto, ahañceva kho pana byādhidhammo samāno byādhiṃ anatīto paraṃ byādhikaṃ disvā aṭṭīyeyyaṃ harāyeyyaṃ jiguccheyyaṃ, na metaṃ assa patirūpan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since I, too, am liable to get sick, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when I see someone else who is sick.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, iti paṭisañcikkhato yo ārogye ārogyamado so sabbaso pahīyi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, I entirely gave up the vanity of health. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assutavā kho puthujjano attanā maraṇadhammo samāno maraṇaṃ anatīto paraṃ mataṃ disvā aṭṭīyati harāyati jigucchati attānaṃyeva atisitvā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When an uneducated ordinary person—who is liable to die, not being exempt from death—sees someone else who is dead, they’re horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are in the same situation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahampi khomhi maraṇadhammo, maraṇaṃ anatīto, ahaṃ ceva kho pana maraṇadhammo samāno maraṇaṃ anatīto paraṃ mataṃ disvā aṭṭīyeyyaṃ harāyeyyaṃ jiguccheyyaṃ, na metaṃ assa patirūpan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since I, too, am liable to die, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when I see someone else who is dead.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, iti paṭisañcikkhato yo jīvite jīvitamado so sabbaso pahīyīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Reflecting like this, I entirely gave up the vanity of life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayome, bhikkhave, madā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these three vanities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yobbanamado, ārogyamado, jīvitamado. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The vanity of youth, of health, and of life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yobbanamadamatto vā, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, an uneducated ordinary person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya duccaritaṃ caritvā, manasā duccaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārogyamadamatto vā, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Intoxicated with the vanity of health … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jīvitamadamatto vā, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Intoxicated with the vanity of life, an uneducated ordinary person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya duccaritaṃ caritvā, manasā duccaritaṃ caritvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yobbanamadamatto vā, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sikkhaṃ paccakkhāya hīnāyāvattati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, health, or life, a mendicant rejects the training and returns to a lesser life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārogyamadamatto vā, bhikkhave, bhikkhu … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jīvitamadamatto vā, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sikkhaṃ paccakkhāya hīnāyāvattatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byādhidhammā jarādhammā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For others, sickness is natural, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho maraṇadhammino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and so are old age and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathādhammā tathāsantā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Though this is how their nature is, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jigucchanti puthujjanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">ordinary people feel disgusted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañce taṃ jiguccheyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If I were to be disgusted </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃdhammesu pāṇisu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with creatures whose nature is such, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na metaṃ patirūpassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">it would not be appropriate for me, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mama evaṃ vihārino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">since my life is just the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṃ evaṃ viharanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Living in such a way, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñatvā dhammaṃ nirūpadhiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I understood the reality without attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārogye yobbanasmiñca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">I mastered all vanities—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jīvitasmiñca ye madā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of health, of youth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe made abhibhosmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and even of life—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhamme daṭṭhu khemataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing safety in renunciation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa me ahu ussāho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Zeal sprang up in me </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nibbānaṃ abhipassato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as I looked to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṃ bhabbo etarahi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now I’m unable </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmāni paṭisevituṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to indulge in sensual pleasures; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anivatti bhavissāmi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">there’s no turning back, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmacariyaparāyaṇo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">until the spiritual life is complete.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
