<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.131-131. Paṭicchannasutta  - 131. Under Cover </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.131. 131. Paṭicchannasutta  - 131. Under Cover </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Kusināravagga  - 13. Kusināra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, paṭicchannāni āvahanti, no vivaṭāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, three things are conveyed under cover, not in the open. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmo, bhikkhave, paṭicchanno āvahati, no vivaṭo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Females are married with a veil, not unveiled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brāhmaṇānaṃ, bhikkhave, mantā paṭicchannā āvahanti, no vivaṭā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Brahmin hymns are conveyed under cover, not openly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchādiṭṭhi, bhikkhave, paṭicchannā āvahati, no vivaṭā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wrong view is conveyed under cover, not in the open. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi paṭicchannāni āvahanti, no vivaṭāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These three things are conveyed under cover, not in the open. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, vivaṭāni virocanti, no paṭicchannāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Three things shine in the open, not under cover. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Candamaṇḍalaṃ, bhikkhave, vivaṭaṃ virocati, no paṭicchannaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The moon shines in the open, not under cover. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sūriyamaṇḍalaṃ, bhikkhave, vivaṭaṃ virocati, no paṭicchannaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The sun shines in the open, not under cover. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathāgatappavedito dhammavinayo, bhikkhave, vivaṭo virocati, no paṭicchanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One shine in the open, not under cover. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi vivaṭāni virocanti, no paṭicchannānī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These three things shine in the open, not under cover.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
