<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.053-53. Aññatarabrāhmaṇasutta  - 53. A Certain Brahmin </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.053. 53. Aññatarabrāhmaṇasutta  - 53. A Certain Brahmin </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 6. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then a brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. Seated to one side he said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘sandiṭṭhiko dhammo sandiṭṭhiko dhammo’ti, bho gotama, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, they speak of ‘a teaching visible in this very life’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bho gotama, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">In what way is the teaching visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ratto kho, brāhmaṇa, rāgena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto attabyābādhāyapi ceteti, parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A greedy person, overcome and overwhelmed by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāge pahīne nevattabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na cetasikaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratto kho … pe … kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāge pahīne neva kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, na vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, na manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratto kho … pe … attatthampi yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, paratthampi yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, ubhayatthampi yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāge pahīne attatthampi yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, paratthampi yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ubhayatthampi yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, brāhmaṇa, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how the teaching is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭho kho, brāhmaṇa, dosena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto attabyābādhāyapi ceteti, parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dose pahīne nevattabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When hate has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho, brāhmaṇa, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This, too, is how the teaching is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mūḷho kho, brāhmaṇa, mohena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto attabyābādhāyapi ceteti, parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mohe pahīne nevattabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na cetasikaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, sandiṭṭhiko dhammo hoti akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This, too, is how the teaching is visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho gotama, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā gotamena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṅghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
