<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.115-115. Appameyyasutta  - 115. Immeasurable </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.115. 115. Appameyyasutta  - 115. Immeasurable </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Āpāyikavagga  - 12. Bound for Loss </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suppameyyo, duppameyyo, appameyyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone easy to measure, someone hard to measure, and someone who is immeasurable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo suppameyyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the person easy to measure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo uddhato hoti unnaḷo capalo mukharo vikiṇṇavāco muṭṭhassati asampajāno asamāhito vibbhantacitto pākatindriyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who is restless, insolent, fickle, gossipy, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo suppameyyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘a person easy to measure’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo duppameyyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the person hard to measure? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo anuddhato hoti anunnaḷo acapalo amukharo avikiṇṇavāco upaṭṭhitassati sampajāno samāhito ekaggacitto saṃvutindriyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who is not restless, insolent, fickle, gossipy, or loose-tongued. They have established mindfulness, situational awareness and immersion, with unified mind and restrained faculties. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo duppameyyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘a person hard to measure’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo appameyyo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And who is the immeasurable person? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu arahaṃ hoti khīṇāsavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a mendicant who is perfected, and has ended defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo appameyyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘an immeasurable person’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmin”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three people found in the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
