<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.064-64. Sarabhasutta  - 64. With Sarabha </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.064. 64. Sarabhasutta  - 64. With Sarabha </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Mahāvagga  - 7. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sarabho nāma paribbājako acirapakkanto hoti imasmā dhammavinayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now at that time a wanderer called Sarabha had recently left this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So rājagahe parisati evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He was telling a crowd in Rājagaha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aññāto mayā samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāya ca panāhaṃ samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammaṃ evāhaṃ tasmā dhammavinayā apakkanto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then I left their teaching and training.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya rājagahaṃ piṇḍāya pavisiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Rājagaha for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṃ kho te bhikkhū sarabhassa paribbājakassa rājagahe parisati evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsamānassa: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They heard what Sarabha was saying. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aññāto mayā samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāya ca panāhaṃ samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammaṃ evāhaṃ tasmā dhammavinayā apakkanto”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū rājagahe piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after the meal, when they returned from alms-round, they went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sarabho nāma, bhante, paribbājako acirapakkanto imasmā dhammavinayā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The wanderer called Sarabha has recently left this teaching and training. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So rājagahe parisati evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He was telling a crowd in Rājagaha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aññāto mayā samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāya ca panāhaṃ samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammaṃ evāhaṃ tasmā dhammavinayā apakkanto’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">then I left their teaching and training.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu, bhante, bhagavā yena sippinikātīraṃ paribbājakārāmo yena sarabho paribbājako tenupasaṅkamatu anukampaṃ upādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, please go to the wanderers’ monastery on the banks of the Sappinī river to see Sarabha the wanderer out of compassion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha consented in silence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena sippinikātīraṃ paribbājakārāmo yena sarabho paribbājako tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Nisajja kho bhagavā sarabhaṃ paribbājakaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the wanderers’ monastery on the banks of the Sappinī river to visit Sarabha the wanderer. He sat on the seat spread out, and said to the wanderer Sarabha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṃ kira tvaṃ, sarabha, evaṃ vadesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it really true, Sarabha, that you’ve been saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘aññāto mayā samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññāya ca panāhaṃ samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammaṃ evāhaṃ tasmā dhammavinayā apakkanto’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">then I left their teaching and training.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, sarabho paribbājako tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, Sarabha kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā sarabhaṃ paribbājakaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vadehi, sarabha, kinti te aññāto samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Tell me, Sarabha, what exactly have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace te aparipūraṃ bhavissati, ahaṃ paripūressāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you’ve not learned it fully, I’ll fill you in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace pana te paripūraṃ bhavissati, ahaṃ anumodissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if you have learned it fully, I’ll agree.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho sarabho paribbājako tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time, Sarabha kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho bhagavā sarabhaṃ paribbājakaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a third time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yo kho, sarabha, paññāyati samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammo vadehi, sarabha, kinti te aññāto samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sarabha, the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan are clear to me. What exactly have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace te aparipūraṃ bhavissati, ahaṃ paripūressāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you’ve not learned it fully, I’ll fill you in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace pana te paripūraṃ bhavissati, ahaṃ anumodissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if you have learned it fully, I’ll agree.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho sarabho paribbājako tuṇhī ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a third time, Sarabha kept silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te paribbājakā sarabhaṃ paribbājakaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those wanderers said to Sarabha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yadeva kho tvaṃ, āvuso sarabha, samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ yāceyyāsi tadeva te samaṇo gotamo pavāreti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“The ascetic Gotama has offered to tell you anything you ask for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vadehāvuso sarabha, kinti te aññāto samaṇānaṃ sakyaputtikānaṃ dhammo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Speak, reverend Sarabha, what exactly have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace te aparipūraṃ bhavissati, samaṇo gotamo paripūressati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you’ve not learned it fully, he’ll fill you in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace pana te paripūraṃ bhavissati, samaṇo gotamo anumodissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if you have learned it fully, he’ll agree.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, sarabho paribbājako tuṇhībhūto maṅkubhūto pattakkhandho adhomukho pajjhāyanto appaṭibhāno nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When this was said, Sarabha sat silent, embarrassed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sarabhaṃ paribbājakaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ maṅkubhūtaṃ pattakkhandhaṃ adhomukhaṃ pajjhāyantaṃ appaṭibhānaṃ viditvā te paribbājake etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing this, the Buddha said to the wanderers: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo kho maṃ, paribbājakā, evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Wanderers, someone might say to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddhassa te paṭijānato ime dhammā anabhisambuddhā’ti, tamahaṃ tattha sādhukaṃ samanuyuñjeyyaṃ samanugāheyyaṃ samanubhāseyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You claim to be a fully awakened Buddha, but regarding these things you’re not fully awakened.’ Then I’d carefully pursue, press, and grill them on that point. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vata mayā sādhukaṃ samanuyuñjiyamāno samanugāhiyamāno samanubhāsiyamāno aṭṭhānametaṃ anavakāso yaṃ so tiṇṇaṃ ṭhānānaṃ nāññataraṃ ṭhānaṃ nigaccheyya, aññena vā aññaṃ paṭicarissati, bahiddhā kathaṃ apanāmessati, kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukarissati, tuṇhībhūto maṅkubhūto pattakkhandho adhomukho pajjhāyanto appaṭibhāno nisīdissati, seyyathāpi sarabho paribbājako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When grilled by me, they would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They’d dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. They’d display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they’d sit silent, embarrassed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, like Sarabha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho maṃ, paribbājakā, evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wanderers, someone might say to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘khīṇāsavassa te paṭijānato ime āsavā aparikkhīṇā’ti, tamahaṃ tattha sādhukaṃ samanuyuñjeyyaṃ samanugāheyyaṃ samanubhāseyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You claim to have ended all defilements, but you still have these defilements.’ Then I’d carefully pursue, press, and grill them on that point. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vata mayā sādhukaṃ samanuyuñjiyamāno samanugāhiyamāno samanubhāsiyamāno aṭṭhānametaṃ anavakāso yaṃ so tiṇṇaṃ ṭhānānaṃ nāññataraṃ ṭhānaṃ nigaccheyya, aññena vā aññaṃ paṭicarissati, bahiddhā kathaṃ apanāmessati, kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukarissati, tuṇhībhūto maṅkubhūto pattakkhandho adhomukho pajjhāyanto appaṭibhāno nisīdissati, seyyathāpi sarabho paribbājako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When grilled by me, they would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They’d dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. They’d display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they’d sit silent, embarrassed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, like Sarabha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho maṃ, paribbājakā, evaṃ vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Wanderers, someone might say to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yassa kho pana te atthāya dhammo desito, so na niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’ti, tamahaṃ tattha sādhukaṃ samanuyuñjeyyaṃ samanugāheyyaṃ samanubhāseyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Your teaching does not lead someone who practices it to the goal of the complete ending of suffering.’ Then I’d carefully pursue, press, and grill them on that point. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vata mayā sādhukaṃ samanuyuñjiyamāno samanugāhiyamāno samanubhāsiyamāno aṭṭhānametaṃ anavakāso yaṃ so tiṇṇaṃ ṭhānānaṃ nāññataraṃ ṭhānaṃ nigaccheyya, aññena vā aññaṃ paṭicarissati, bahiddhā kathaṃ apanāmessati, kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukarissati, tuṇhībhūto maṅkubhūto pattakkhandho adhomukho pajjhāyanto appaṭibhāno nisīdissati, seyyathāpi sarabho paribbājako”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When grilled by me, they would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They’d dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. They’d display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they’d sit silent, embarrassed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, like Sarabha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā sippinikātīre paribbājakārāme tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ naditvā vehāsaṃ pakkāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha, having roared his lion’s roar three times in the wanderers’ monastery on the bank of the Sappinī river, rose into the sky and flew away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te paribbājakā acirapakkantassa bhagavato sarabhaṃ paribbājakaṃ samantato vācāyasannitodakena sañjambharimakaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon after the Buddha left, those wanderers gave Sarabha a comprehensive tongue-lashing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“seyyathāpi, āvuso sarabha, brahāraññe jarasiṅgālo ‘sīhanādaṃ nadissāmī’ti siṅgālakaṃyeva nadati, bheraṇḍakaṃyeva nadati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Sarabha, you’re just like an old jackal in the formidable wilderness who thinks, ‘I’ll roar a lion’s roar!’ but they still only manage to squeal and yelp like a jackal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho tvaṃ, āvuso sarabha, aññatreva samaṇena gotamena ‘sīhanādaṃ nadissāmī’ti siṅgālakaṃyeva nadasi bheraṇḍakaṃyeva nadasi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the ascetic Gotama wasn’t here you said ‘I’ll roar a lion’s roar!’ but you only managed to squeal and yelp like a jackal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, āvuso sarabha, ambukasañcarī ‘purisakaravitaṃ ravissāmī’ti ambukasañcariravitaṃyeva ravati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re just like a golden oriole who thinks, ‘I’ll cry like a cuckoo!’ but they still only manage to cry like a golden oriole. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho tvaṃ, āvuso sarabha, aññatreva samaṇena gotamena ‘purisakaravitaṃ ravissāmī’ti, ambukasañcariravitaṃyeva ravasi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the ascetic Gotama wasn’t here you said ‘I’ll cry like a cuckoo!’ but you still only managed to cry like a golden oriole. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, āvuso sarabha, usabho suññāya gosālāya gambhīraṃ naditabbaṃ maññati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re just like a bull that thinks to bellow only when the cowstall is empty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho tvaṃ, āvuso sarabha, aññatreva samaṇena gotamena gambhīraṃ naditabbaṃ maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, you only thought to bellow when the ascetic Gotama wasn’t here.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te paribbājakā sarabhaṃ paribbājakaṃ samantato vācāyasannitodakena sañjambharimakaṃsūti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how those wanderers gave Sarabha a comprehensive tongue-lashing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
