<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.142-142. Assājānīyasutta  - 142. The Thoroughbred </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.142. 142. Assājānīyasutta  - 142. The Thoroughbred </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Yodhājīvavagga  - 14. A Warrior </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayo ca, bhikkhave, bhadre assājānīye desessāmi tayo ca bhadre purisājānīye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you the three fine thoroughbred horses, and the three fine thoroughbred people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katame ca, bhikkhave, tayo bhadrā assājānīyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What are the three fine thoroughbred horses? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco bhadro assājānīyo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">One fine thoroughbred horse … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo bhadrā assājānīyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three fine thoroughbred horses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, tayo bhadrā purisājānīyā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the three fine thoroughbred people? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco bhadro purisājānīyo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">One fine thoroughbred person … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhadro purisājānīyo … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a fine thoroughbred person … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa javasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re fast, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhidhamme kho pana abhivinaye pañhaṃ puṭṭho vissajjeti, no saṃsādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa vaṇṇasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re beautiful, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhī kho pana hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa ārohapariṇāhasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re well proportioned, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhadro purisājānīyo javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a fine thoroughbred person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo bhadrā purisājānīyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three fine thoroughbred people.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
