<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.032-32. Ānandasutta  - 32. With Ānanda </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.032. 32. Ānandasutta  - 32. With Ānanda </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Devadūtavagga  - 4. Messengers of the Gods </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā nu kho, bhante, bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā nāssu, bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā nāssu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion such that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja viharato ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na honti tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja vihareyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that they’d live having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where ego, possessiveness, and underlying tendency to conceit are no more?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Siyā, ānanda, bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā nāssu, bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā nāssu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“It could be, Ānanda, that a mendicant gains a state of immersion such that they have no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja viharato ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na honti tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja vihareyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that they’d live having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where ego, possessiveness, and underlying tendency to conceit are no more.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana, bhante, siyā bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā nāssu, bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā nāssu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how could this be, sir?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja viharato ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na honti tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja vihareyyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idhānanda, bhikkhuno evaṃ hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant thinks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘etaṃ santaṃ etaṃ paṇītaṃ yadidaṃ sabbasaṅkhārasamatho sabbūpadhipaṭinissaggo taṇhākkhayo virāgo nirodho nibbānan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, siyā bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā nāssu, bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā nāssu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how, Ānanda, a mendicant might gain a state of immersion such that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja viharato ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na honti tañca cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ upasampajja vihareyyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that they’d live having achieved the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where ego, possessiveness, and underlying tendency to conceit are no more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idañca pana metaṃ, ānanda, sandhāya bhāsitaṃ pārāyane puṇṇakapañhe: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And Ānanda, this is what I was referring to in ‘The Way to the Beyond’, in ‘The Questions of Puṇṇaka’ when I said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Saṅkhāya lokasmiṃ paroparāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Having surveyed the world high and low, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassiñjitaṃ natthi kuhiñci loke; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re not shaken by anything in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santo vidhūmo anīgho nirāso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Peaceful, unclouded, untroubled, with no need for hope—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atāri so jātijaranti brūmī’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve crossed over birth and old age, I declare.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
