<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.104-104. Paṭhamaassādasutta  - 104. Gratification (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.104. 104. Paṭhamaassādasutta  - 104. Gratification (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Sambodhavagga  - 11. Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lokassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, assādapariyesanaṃ acariṃ. Yo loke assādo tadajjhagamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I went in search of the world’s gratification, and I found it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatako loke assādo, paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of gratification in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, ādīnavapariyesanaṃ acariṃ. Yo loke ādīnavo tadajjhagamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went in search of the world’s drawbacks, and I found them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatako loke ādīnavo, paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of the drawbacks in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokassāhaṃ, bhikkhave, nissaraṇapariyesanaṃ acariṃ. Yaṃ loke nissaraṇaṃ tadajjhagamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I went in search of escape from the world, and I found it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatakaṃ loke nissaraṇaṃ, paññāya me taṃ sudiṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of escape from the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañcāhaṃ, bhikkhave, lokassa assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ nābbhaññāsiṃ, neva tāvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya ‘anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho’ti paccaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I didn’t truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca khvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, lokassa assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, athāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya ‘anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho’ti paccaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when I did truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñāṇañca pana me dassanaṃ udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge and vision arose in me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘akuppā me vimutti, ayamantimā jāti, natthi dāni punabbhavo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there are no more future lives.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
