<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.103-103. Pubbevasambodhasutta  - 103. Before Awakening </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.103. 103. Pubbevasambodhasutta  - 103. Before Awakening </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Sambodhavagga  - 11. Awakening </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbeva me, bhikkhave, sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I thought: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ko nu kho loke assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇan’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What’s the gratification in the world? What’s the drawback? What’s the escape?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then it occurred to me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yaṃ kho lokaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ, ayaṃ loke assādo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The pleasure and happiness that arise from the world: this is its gratification. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ loko anicco dukkho vipariṇāmadhammo, ayaṃ loke ādīnavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That the world is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo loke chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ, idaṃ loke nissaraṇan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Removing and giving up desire and greed for the world: this is its escape.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvakīvañcāhaṃ, bhikkhave, evaṃ lokassa assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ nābbhaññāsiṃ, neva tāvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya ‘anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho’ti paccaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As long as I didn’t truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca khvāhaṃ, bhikkhave, evaṃ lokassa assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, athāhaṃ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya ‘anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho’ti paccaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when I did truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñāṇañca pana me dassanaṃ udapādi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowledge and vision arose in me: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘akuppā me vimutti, ayamantimā jāti, natthi dāni punabbhavo’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there are no more future lives.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
