<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.059-59. Jāṇussoṇisutta  - 59. With Jāṇussoṇi </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.059. 59. Jāṇussoṇisutta  - 59. With Jāṇussoṇi </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 6. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho jāṇussoṇi brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ … pe … ekamantaṃ nisinno kho jāṇussoṇi brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. Seated to one side he said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yassassu, bho gotama, yañño vā saddhaṃ vā thālipāko vā deyyadhammaṃ vā, tevijjesu brāhmaṇesu dānaṃ dadeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, whoever has a sacrifice, an offering of food for ancestors, a dish of milk-rice prepared for an auspicious ceremony, or a gift to give, should give it to the brahmins who have mastered the three Vedic knowledges.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana, brāhmaṇa, brāhmaṇā tevijjaṃ paññapentī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But brahmin, how do the brahmins describe a brahmin who is proficient in the three Vedic knowledges?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha kho, bho gotama, brāhmaṇo ubhato sujāto hoti mātito ca pitito ca saṃsuddhagahaṇiko yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā akkhitto anupakkuṭṭho jātivādena, ajjhāyako mantadharo, tiṇṇaṃ vedānaṃ pāragū sanighaṇḍukeṭubhānaṃ sākkharappabhedānaṃ itihāsapañcamānaṃ, padako, veyyākaraṇo, lokāyatamahāpurisalakkhaṇesu anavayoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, it’s when a brahmin is well born on both his mother’s and father’s side, of pure descent, irrefutable and impeccable in questions of ancestry back to the seventh paternal generation. He recites and remembers the hymns, and has mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies, ritual, phonology and etymology, and the testament as fifth. He knows philology and grammar, and is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bho gotama, brāhmaṇā tevijjaṃ paññapentī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how the brahmins describe a brahmin who is proficient in the three Vedic knowledges.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññathā kho, brāhmaṇa, brāhmaṇā brāhmaṇaṃ tevijjaṃ paññapenti, aññathā ca pana ariyassa vinaye tevijjo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of the noble one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā kathaṃ pana, bho gotama, ariyassa vinaye tevijjo hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Master Gotama, how is one a master of the three knowledges in the training of the noble one? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu me bhavaṃ gotamo tathā dhammaṃ desetu yathā ariyassa vinaye tevijjo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Master Gotama, please teach me this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tena hi, brāhmaṇa, suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, brahmin, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bho”ti kho jāṇussoṇi brāhmaṇo bhagavato paccassosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes sir,” Jāṇussoṇi replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Idha pana, brāhmaṇa, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, it’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enters and remains in the fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte pubbenivāsānussatiñāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo … pe … iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamassa paṭhamā vijjā adhigatā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first knowledge that they attain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjā vihatā, vijjā uppannā; tamo vihato, āloko uppanno yathā taṃ appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte sattānaṃ cutūpapātañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena … pe … yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human, they understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamassa dutiyā vijjā adhigatā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second knowledge that they attain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjā vihatā, vijjā uppannā; tamo vihato, āloko uppanno yathā taṃ appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte āsavānaṃ khayañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ime āsavā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ āsavanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa evaṃ jānato evaṃ passato kāmāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, bhavāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, avijjāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamassa tatiyā vijjā adhigatā hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third knowledge that they attain. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjā vihatā, vijjā uppannā; tamo vihato, āloko uppanno yathā taṃ appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharatoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance is destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed, and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sīlabbatasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">One who is perfect in precepts and observances, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pahitatto samāhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">resolute and serene, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittaṃ yassa vasībhūtaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">whose mind is mastered, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaggaṃ susamāhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">unified, serene; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbenivāsaṃ yo vedī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">who knows their past lives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saggāpāyañca passati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and sees heaven and places of loss, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atho jātikkhayaṃ patto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and has attained the end of rebirth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhiññāvosito muni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that sage has perfect insight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etāhi tīhi vijjāhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of these three knowledges </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tevijjo hoti brāhmaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a brahmin is a master of the three knowledges. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamahaṃ vadāmi tevijjaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s who I call a three-knowledge master, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāññaṃ lapitalāpananti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and not the other one, the lip-reciter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, ariyassa vinaye tevijjo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This, brahmin, is a master of the three knowledges in the training of the noble one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aññathā, bho gotama, brāhmaṇānaṃ tevijjo, aññathā ca pana ariyassa vinaye tevijjo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, the master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of the noble one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imassa ca, bho gotama, ariyassa vinaye tevijjassa brāhmaṇānaṃ tevijjo kalaṃ nāgghati soḷasiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And, Master Gotama, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of the three knowledges in the training of the noble one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
