<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.140-140. Assakhaḷuṅkasutta  - 140. A Wild Colt </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.140. 140. Assakhaḷuṅkasutta  - 140. A Wild Colt </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">14. Yodhājīvavagga  - 14. A Warrior </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayo ca, bhikkhave, assakhaḷuṅke desessāmi tayo ca purisakhaḷuṅke. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I will teach you about three wild colts and three wild people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katame ca, bhikkhave, tayo assakhaḷuṅkā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“What are the three wild colts? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco assakhaḷuṅko javasampanno hoti; na vaṇṇasampanno, na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One wild colt is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco assakhaḷuṅko javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca; na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Another wild colt is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco assakhaḷuṅko javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While another wild colt is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo assakhaḷuṅkā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three wild colts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame ca, bhikkhave, tayo purisakhaḷuṅkā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the three wild people? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco purisakhaḷuṅko javasampanno hoti; na vaṇṇasampanno, na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">One wild person is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco purisakhaḷuṅko javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca; na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Another wild person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco purisakhaḷuṅko javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">While another wild person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, purisakhaḷuṅko javasampanno hoti; na vaṇṇasampanno na ārohapariṇāhasampanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a wild person fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa javasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re fast, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhidhamme kho pana abhivinaye pañhaṃ puṭṭho saṃsādeti, no vissajjeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when asked a question about the teaching or training, they falter without answering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa na vaṇṇasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re not beautiful, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na kho pana lābhī hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they don’t receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa na ārohapariṇāhasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re not well proportioned, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, purisakhaḷuṅko javasampanno hoti; na vaṇṇasampanno, na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a wild person is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, purisakhaḷuṅko javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca; na ārohapariṇāhasampanno? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a wild person fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa javasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re fast, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhidhamme kho pana abhivinaye pañhaṃ puṭṭho vissajjeti, no saṃsādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa vaṇṇasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re beautiful, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na pana lābhī hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa na ārohapariṇāhasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re not well proportioned, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, purisakhaḷuṅko javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca; na ārohapariṇāhasampanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a wild person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, purisakhaḷuṅko javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a wild person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti … pe … ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa javasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re fast, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhidhamme kho pana abhivinaye pañhaṃ puṭṭho vissajjeti, no saṃsādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa vaṇṇasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re beautiful, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhī kho pana hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamassa ārohapariṇāhasmiṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how they’re well proportioned, I say. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, purisakhaḷuṅko javasampanno ca hoti vaṇṇasampanno ca ārohapariṇāhasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is how a wild person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo purisakhaḷuṅkā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three wild people.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
