<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.101-101. Paṃsudhovakasutta  - 101. A Panner </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.101. 101. Paṃsudhovakasutta  - 101. A Panner </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Loṇakapallavagga  - 10. A Lump of Salt </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Santi, bhikkhave, jātarūpassa oḷārikā upakkilesā paṃsuvālukā sakkharakaṭhalā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Gold has coarse corruptions: sand, soil, and gravel. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ paṃsudhovako vā paṃsudhovakantevāsī vā doṇiyaṃ ākiritvā dhovati sandhovati niddhovati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A panner or their apprentice pours it into a pan, where they wash, rinse, and clean it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ pahīne tasmiṃ byantīkate santi jātarūpassa majjhimasahagatā upakkilesā sukhumasakkharā thūlavālukā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When that’s been eliminated, there are medium corruptions in the gold: fine grit and coarse sand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ paṃsudhovako vā paṃsudhovakantevāsī vā dhovati sandhovati niddhovati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The panner washes it again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ pahīne tasmiṃ byantīkate santi jātarūpassa sukhumasahagatā upakkilesā sukhumavālukā kāḷajallikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When that’s been eliminated, there are fine corruptions in the gold: fine sand and black grime. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ paṃsudhovako vā paṃsudhovakantevāsī vā dhovati sandhovati niddhovati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The panner washes it again. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ pahīne tasmiṃ byantīkate athāparaṃ suvaṇṇasikatāvasissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When that’s been eliminated, only gold dust is left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamenaṃ suvaṇṇakāro vā suvaṇṇakārantevāsī vā jātarūpaṃ mūsāyaṃ pakkhipitvā dhamati sandhamati niddhamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A goldsmith or their apprentice places the gold in a crucible where they blow, melt, and smelt it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ hoti jātarūpaṃ dhantaṃ sandhantaṃ niddhantaṃ aniddhantakasāvaṃ, na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ, na ca pabhassaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca, na ca sammā upeti kammāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Still the gold is not settled and the dross is not totally gone. It’s not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and not completely ready for working. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hoti so, bhikkhave, samayo yaṃ suvaṇṇakāro vā suvaṇṇakārantevāsī vā taṃ jātarūpaṃ dhamati sandhamati niddhamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But the goldsmith keeps on blowing, melting, and smelting it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ hoti jātarūpaṃ dhantaṃ sandhantaṃ niddhantaṃ niddhantakasāvaṃ, mudu ca hoti kammaniyañca pabhassarañca, na ca pabhaṅgu, sammā upeti kammāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gold becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and ready to be worked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassā yassā ca pilandhanavikatiyā ākaṅkhati—yadi paṭṭikāya, yadi kuṇḍalāya, yadi gīveyyake, yadi suvaṇṇamālāya—tañcassa atthaṃ anubhoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, santi adhicittamanuyuttassa bhikkhuno oḷārikā upakkilesā kāyaduccaritaṃ vacīduccaritaṃ manoduccaritaṃ, tamenaṃ sacetaso bhikkhu dabbajātiko pajahati vinodeti byantīkaroti anabhāvaṃ gameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who is committed to the higher mind has coarse corruptions: bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct. A sincere, capable mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ pahīne tasmiṃ byantīkate santi adhicittamanuyuttassa bhikkhuno majjhimasahagatā upakkilesā kāmavitakko byāpādavitakko vihiṃsāvitakko, tamenaṃ sacetaso bhikkhu dabbajātiko pajahati vinodeti byantīkaroti anabhāvaṃ gameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’ve been given up and eliminated, there are middling corruptions: sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. A sincere, capable mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ pahīne tasmiṃ byantīkate santi adhicittamanuyuttassa bhikkhuno sukhumasahagatā upakkilesā ñātivitakko janapadavitakko anavaññattipaṭisaṃyutto vitakko, tamenaṃ sacetaso bhikkhu dabbajātiko pajahati vinodeti byantīkaroti anabhāvaṃ gameti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’ve been given up and eliminated, there are fine corruptions: thoughts of family, country, and being looked up to. A sincere, capable mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃ pahīne tasmiṃ byantīkate athāparaṃ dhammavitakkāvasissanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they’ve been given up and eliminated, only thoughts about the teaching are left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So hoti samādhi na ceva santo na ca paṇīto nappaṭippassaddhaladdho na ekodibhāvādhigato sasaṅkhāraniggayhavāritagato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That immersion is not peaceful or sublime or tranquil or unified, but is held in place by forceful suppression. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hoti so, bhikkhave, samayo yaṃ taṃ cittaṃ ajjhattaṃyeva santiṭṭhati sannisīdati ekodi hoti samādhiyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But there comes a time when that mind is stilled internally; it settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So hoti samādhi santo paṇīto paṭippassaddhiladdho ekodibhāvādhigato na sasaṅkhāraniggayhavāritagato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That immersion is peaceful and sublime and tranquil and unified, not held in place by forceful suppression. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa yassa ca abhiññā sacchikaraṇīyassa dhammassa cittaṃ abhininnāmeti abhiññā sacchikiriyāya tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇāti sati satiāyatane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They become capable of realizing anything that can be realized by insight to which they extend the mind, in each and every case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhaveyyaṃ—ekopi hutvā bahudhā assaṃ, bahudhāpi hutvā eko assaṃ; āvibhāvaṃ, tirobhāvaṃ; tirokuṭṭaṃ tiropākāraṃ tiropabbataṃ asajjamāno gaccheyyaṃ, seyyathāpi ākāse; pathaviyāpi ummujjanimujjaṃ kareyyaṃ, seyyathāpi udake; udakepi abhijjamāne gaccheyyaṃ, seyyathāpi pathaviyaṃ; ākāsepi pallaṅkena kameyyaṃ, seyyathāpi pakkhī sakuṇo; imepi candimasūriye evaṃmahiddhike evaṃmahānubhāve pāṇinā parimaseyyaṃ parimajjeyyaṃ; yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vatteyyan’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying myself and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unimpeded through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with my hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling my body as far as the Brahmā realm.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇāti sati satiāyatane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are capable of realizing it, in each and every case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘dibbāya sotadhātuyā visuddhāya atikkantamānusikāya ubho sadde suṇeyyaṃ dibbe ca mānuse ca ye dūre santike cā’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and divine, whether near or far.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇāti sati satiāyatane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are capable of realizing it, in each and every case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘parasattānaṃ parapuggalānaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajāneyyaṃ—sarāgaṃ vā cittaṃ sarāgaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ, vītarāgaṃ vā cittaṃ vītarāgaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ; sadosaṃ vā cittaṃ sadosaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ, vītadosaṃ vā cittaṃ vītadosaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ; samohaṃ vā cittaṃ samohaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ, vītamohaṃ vā cittaṃ vītamohaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ; saṅkhittaṃ vā cittaṃ saṅkhittaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ, vikkhittaṃ vā cittaṃ vikkhittaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ; mahaggataṃ vā cittaṃ mahaggataṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ, amahaggataṃ vā cittaṃ amahaggataṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ; sauttaraṃ vā cittaṃ sauttaraṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ, anuttaraṃ vā cittaṃ anuttaraṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ; samāhitaṃ vā cittaṃ samāhitaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ, asamāhitaṃ vā cittaṃ asamāhitaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ; vimuttaṃ vā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ cittanti pajāneyyaṃ, avimuttaṃ vā cittaṃ avimuttaṃ cittanti pajāneyyan’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand mind with greed as “mind with greed”, and mind without greed as “mind without greed”; mind with hate as “mind with hate”, and mind without hate as “mind without hate”; mind with delusion as “mind with delusion”, and mind without delusion as “mind without delusion”; constricted mind as “constricted mind”, and scattered mind as “scattered mind”; expansive mind as “expansive mind”, and unexpansive mind as “unexpansive mind”; mind that is not supreme as “mind that is not supreme”, and mind that is supreme as “mind that is supreme”; mind immersed in samādhi as “mind immersed in samādhi”, and mind not immersed in samādhi as “mind not immersed in samādhi”; freed mind as “freed mind”, and unfreed mind as “unfreed mind”.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇāti sati satiāyatane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are capable of realizing it, in each and every case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussareyyaṃ, seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo tissopi jātiyo catassopi jātiyo pañcapi jātiyo dasapi jātiyo vīsampi jātiyo tiṃsampi jātiyo cattālīsampi jātiyo paññāsampi jātiyo jātisatampi jātisahassampi jātisatasahassampi anekepi saṃvaṭṭakappe anekepi vivaṭṭakappe anekepi saṃvaṭṭavivaṭṭakappe: “amutrāsiṃ evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto evaṃvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṃsukhadukkhappaṭisaṃvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto amutra udapādiṃ; tatrāpāsiṃ evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto evaṃvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṃsukhadukkhappaṭisaṃvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto idhūpapanno”ti, iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussareyyan’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. May I remember: “There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.” May I recollect my many past lives, with features and details.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇāti sati satiāyatane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are capable of realizing it, in each and every case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passeyyaṃ cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe, sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajāneyyaṃ: “ime vata bhonto sattā kāyaduccaritena samannāgatā vacīduccaritena samannāgatā manoduccaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṃ upavādakā micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannā; ime vā pana bhonto sattā kāyasucaritena samannāgatā vacīsucaritena samannāgatā manosucaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṃ anupavādakā sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapannā”ti, iti dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passeyyaṃ cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe, sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajāneyyan’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place—and understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds: “These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they acted out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇāti sati satiāyatane. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are capable of realizing it, in each and every case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So sace ākaṅkhati: ‘āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If they wish: ‘May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbataṃ pāpuṇāti sati satiāyatane”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They are capable of realizing it, in each and every case.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
