<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.076-76. Paṭhamabhavasutta  - 76. Continued Existence (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.076. 76. Paṭhamabhavasutta  - 76. Continued Existence (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Ānandavagga  - 8. Ānanda </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhavo, bhavoti, bhante, vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘continued existence’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, bhavo hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is continued existence defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kāmadhātuvepakkañca, ānanda, kammaṃ nābhavissa, api nu kho kāmabhavo paññāyethā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“If, Ānanda, there were no deeds to result in the sensual realm, would continued existence in the sensual realm still come about?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iti kho, ānanda, kammaṃ khettaṃ, viññāṇaṃ bījaṃ, taṇhā sneho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ hīnāya dhātuyā viññāṇaṃ patiṭṭhitaṃ evaṃ āyatiṃ punabbhavābhinibbatti hoti. () </span></p>
<p class="p3">The consciousness of sentient beings—hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving—is established in a lower realm. That’s how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpadhātuvepakkañca, ānanda, kammaṃ nābhavissa, api nu kho rūpabhavo paññāyethā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">If there were no deeds to result in the realm of luminous form, would continued existence in the realm of luminous form still come about?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iti kho, ānanda, kammaṃ khettaṃ, viññāṇaṃ bījaṃ, taṇhā sneho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ majjhimāya dhātuyā viññāṇaṃ patiṭṭhitaṃ evaṃ āyatiṃ punabbhavābhinibbatti hoti. () </span></p>
<p class="p3">The consciousness of sentient beings—hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving—is established in a middle realm. That’s how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpadhātuvepakkañca, ānanda, kammaṃ nābhavissa, api nu kho arūpabhavo paññāyethā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">If there were no deeds to result in the formless realm, would continued existence in the formless realm still come about?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“No hetaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iti kho, ānanda, kammaṃ khettaṃ, viññāṇaṃ bījaṃ, taṇhā sneho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjānīvaraṇānaṃ sattānaṃ taṇhāsaṃyojanānaṃ paṇītāya dhātuyā viññāṇaṃ patiṭṭhitaṃ evaṃ āyatiṃ punabbhavābhinibbatti hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The consciousness of sentient beings—hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving—is established in a higher realm. That’s how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, ānanda, bhavo hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how continued existence is defined.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
