<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.019-19. Paṭhamapāpaṇikasutta  - 19. A Shopkeeper (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.019. 19. Paṭhamapāpaṇikasutta  - 19. A Shopkeeper (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rathakāravagga  - 2. The Chariot-maker </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato pāpaṇiko abhabbo anadhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ adhigantuṃ, adhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a shopkeeper who has three factors is unable to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko pubbaṇhasamayaṃ na sakkaccaṃ kammantaṃ adhiṭṭhāti, majjhanhikasamayaṃ na sakkaccaṃ kammantaṃ adhiṭṭhāti, sāyanhasamayaṃ na sakkaccaṃ kammantaṃ adhiṭṭhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a shopkeeper doesn’t carefully apply themselves to their work in the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi aṅgehi samannāgato pāpaṇiko abhabbo anadhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ adhigantuṃ, adhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A shopkeeper who has these three factors is unable to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu abhabbo anadhigataṃ vā kusalaṃ dhammaṃ adhigantuṃ, adhigataṃ vā kusalaṃ dhammaṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who has three factors is unable to acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pubbaṇhasamayaṃ na sakkaccaṃ samādhinimittaṃ adhiṭṭhāti, majjhanhikasamayaṃ na sakkaccaṃ samādhinimittaṃ adhiṭṭhāti, sāyanhasamayaṃ na sakkaccaṃ samādhinimittaṃ adhiṭṭhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t carefully apply themselves to a meditation subject as a foundation of immersion in the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu abhabbo anadhigataṃ vā kusalaṃ dhammaṃ adhigantuṃ, adhigataṃ vā kusalaṃ dhammaṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has these three factors is unable to acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato pāpaṇiko bhabbo anadhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ adhigantuṃ, adhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A shopkeeper who has three factors is able to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko pubbaṇhasamayaṃ sakkaccaṃ kammantaṃ adhiṭṭhāti, majjhanhikasamayaṃ … pe … sāyanhasamayaṃ sakkaccaṃ kammantaṃ adhiṭṭhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a shopkeeper carefully applies themselves to their work in the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi aṅgehi samannāgato pāpaṇiko bhabbo anadhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ adhigantuṃ, adhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A shopkeeper who has these three factors is able to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu bhabbo anadhigataṃ vā kusalaṃ dhammaṃ adhigantuṃ, adhigataṃ vā kusalaṃ dhammaṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who has three factors is able to acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pubbaṇhasamayaṃ sakkaccaṃ samādhinimittaṃ adhiṭṭhāti, majjhanhikasamayaṃ … pe … sāyanhasamayaṃ sakkaccaṃ samādhinimittaṃ adhiṭṭhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant carefully applies themselves to a meditation subject as a foundation of immersion in the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu bhabbo anadhigataṃ vā kusalaṃ dhammaṃ adhigantuṃ, adhigataṃ vā kusalaṃ dhammaṃ phātiṃ kātun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has these three factors is able to acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they’ve already acquired.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
