<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.048-48. Pabbatarājasutta  - 48. The King of Mountains </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.048. 48. Pabbatarājasutta  - 48. The King of Mountains </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Cūḷavagga  - 5. The Lesser Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Himavantaṃ, bhikkhave, pabbatarājaṃ nissāya mahāsālā tīhi vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, great sal trees grow in three ways supported by the Himalayas, the king of mountains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāhi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sākhāpattapalāsena vaḍḍhanti, tacapapaṭikāya vaḍḍhanti, pheggusārena vaḍḍhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The branches, leaves, and foliage; the bark and shoots; and the softwood and heartwood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Himavantaṃ, bhikkhave, pabbatarājaṃ nissāya mahāsālā imāhi tīhi vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Great sal trees grow in these three ways supported by the Himalayas, the king of mountains. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, saddhaṃ kulapatiṃ nissāya anto jano tīhi vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a family grows in three ways supported by a family head with faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāhi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhāya vaḍḍhati, sīlena vaḍḍhati, paññāya vaḍḍhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Faith, ethics, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhaṃ, bhikkhave, kulapatiṃ nissāya anto jano imāhi tīhi vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A family grows in these three ways supported by a family head with faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāpi pabbato selo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Supported by the mountain crags </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">araññasmiṃ brahāvane; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in the wilds, the formidable forest, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ rukkhā upanissāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the tree grows </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vaḍḍhante te vanappatī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to become lord of the forest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatheva sīlasampannaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So too, when the family head </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhaṃ kulapatiṃ idha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">is ethical and faithful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upanissāya vaḍḍhanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">supported by them, they grow: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puttadārā ca bandhavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">children, partners, and kin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amaccā ñātisaṅghā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">colleagues, relatives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye cassa anujīvino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and those dependent for their livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tyāssa sīlavato sīlaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing the ethical conduct of the virtuous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cāgaṃ sucaritāni ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the generosity and good deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passamānānukubbanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who see clearly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attamatthaṃ vicakkhaṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">do likewise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha dhammaṃ caritvāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having practiced the teaching here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maggaṃ sugatigāminaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the path that goes to a good place, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandino devalokasmiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they delight in the heavenly realm, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">modanti kāmakāmino”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">enjoying all the pleasures they desire.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
