<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.090-90. Dutiyasikkhattayasutta  - 90. Three Trainings (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.090. 90. Dutiyasikkhattayasutta  - 90. Three Trainings (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Samaṇavagga  - 9. Ascetics </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, sikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these are the three trainings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhisīlasikkhā, adhicittasikkhā, adhipaññāsikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, adhisīlasikkhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the training in the higher ethics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the code of conduct, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, adhisīlasikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the training in the higher ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, adhicittasikkhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the training in the higher mind? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi … pe … catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, adhicittasikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the training in the higher mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, adhipaññāsikkhā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is the training in the higher wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, adhipaññāsikkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called the training in the higher wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso sikkhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three trainings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhisīlaṃ adhicittaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The higher ethics, the higher mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhipaññañca vīriyavā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the higher wisdom should be practiced </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thāmavā dhitimā jhāyī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">by those energetic, strong, and resolute, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sato guttindriyo care. </span></p>
<p class="p3">practicing absorption, mindful, with guarded senses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā pure tathā pacchā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As before, so after; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā pacchā tathā pure; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as after, so before. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā adho tathā uddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As below, so above; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā uddhaṃ tathā adho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as above, so below. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā divā tathā rattiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As by day, so by night; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathā rattiṃ tathā divā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as by night, so by day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhibhuyya disā sabbā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having mastered every direction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamāṇasamādhinā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">with limitless immersion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamāhu sekhaṃ paṭipadaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they call them a ‘trainee on the path’, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atho saṃsuddhacāriyaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and ‘one living a pure life’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamāhu loke sambuddhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a wise one who has gone to the end of the path </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhīraṃ paṭipadantaguṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they call a ‘Buddha’ in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāṇassa nirodhena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the cessation of consciousness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṇhākkhayavimuttino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">freed by the ending of craving, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pajjotasseva nibbānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the liberation of their heart </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vimokkho hoti cetaso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is like a lamp going out.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
