<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.026-26. Sevitabbasutta  - 26. Associates </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.026. 26. Sevitabbasutta  - 26. Associates </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Puggalavagga  - 3. Persons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These three people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, puggalo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a person you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, puggalo sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a person you should associate with, accompany, and attend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, puggalo sakkatvā garuṃ katvā sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a person you should associate with, accompany, and attend with honor and respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the person you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo hīno hoti sīlena samādhinā paññāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who is inferior in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpo, bhikkhave, puggalo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo aññatra anuddayā aññatra anukampā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend such a person, except out of kindness and compassion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the person you should associate with, accompany, and attend? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sadiso hoti sīlena samādhinā paññāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who is similar in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpo, bhikkhave, puggalo sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should associate with, accompany, and attend such a person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlasāmaññagatānaṃ sataṃ sīlakathā ca no bhavissati, sā ca no pavattinī bhavissati, sā ca no phāsu bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking, ‘Since our ethical conduct is similar, we can discuss ethics, the conversation will flow, and we’ll both be at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādhisāmaññagatānaṃ sataṃ samādhikathā ca no bhavissati, sā ca no pavattinī bhavissati, sā ca no phāsu bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since our immersion is similar, we can discuss immersion, the conversation will flow, and we’ll both be at ease. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññāsāmaññagatānaṃ sataṃ paññākathā ca no bhavissati, sā ca no pavattinī bhavissati, sā ca no phāsu bhavissatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since our wisdom is similar, we can discuss wisdom, the conversation will flow, and we’ll both be at ease.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā evarūpo puggalo sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should associate with, accompany, and attend such a person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo sakkatvā garuṃ katvā sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the person you should associate with, accompany, and attend with honor and respect? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo adhiko hoti sīlena samādhinā paññāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who is superior in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpo, bhikkhave, puggalo sakkatvā garuṃ katvā sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should associate with, accompany, and attend such a person with honor and respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti aparipūraṃ vā sīlakkhandhaṃ paripūressāmi, paripūraṃ vā sīlakkhandhaṃ tattha tattha paññāya anuggahessāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking, ‘I’ll fulfill the entire spectrum of ethical conduct I haven’t yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every situation the ethical conduct I’ve already fulfilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aparipūraṃ vā samādhikkhandhaṃ paripūressāmi, paripūraṃ vā samādhikkhandhaṃ tattha tattha paññāya anuggahessāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll fulfill the entire spectrum of immersion I haven’t yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every situation the immersion I’ve already fulfilled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aparipūraṃ vā paññākkhandhaṃ paripūressāmi, paripūraṃ vā paññākkhandhaṃ tattha tattha paññāya anuggahessāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll fulfill the entire spectrum of wisdom I haven’t yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every situation the wisdom I’ve already fulfilled.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā evarūpo puggalo sakkatvā garuṃ katvā sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should associate with, accompany, and attend this person with honor and respect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasminti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three people found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nihīyati puriso nihīnasevī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man who associates with an inferior goes downhill, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca hāyetha kadāci tulyasevī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">but associating with an equal, you’ll never decline; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seṭṭhamupanamaṃ udeti khippaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">following the best, you’ll quickly rise up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā attano uttariṃ bhajethā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so you should keep company with people better than you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
