<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.098-98. Tatiyaājānīyasutta  - 98. The Thoroughbred (3rd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.098. 98. Tatiyaājānīyasutta  - 98. The Thoroughbred (3rd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Loṇakapallavagga  - 10. A Lump of Salt </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato rañño bhadro assājānīyo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅganteva saṅkhayaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño bhadro assājānīyo vaṇṇasampanno ca hoti balasampanno ca javasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and fast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi aṅgehi samannāgato rañño bhadro assājānīyo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅganteva saṅkhyaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a king. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant with three factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vaṇṇasampanno ca hoti balasampanno ca javasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is beautiful, strong, and fast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vaṇṇasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant beautiful? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vaṇṇasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is beautiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu balasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant strong? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu balasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is strong. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu javasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant fast? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu javasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is fast. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these three factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
