<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.125-125. Gotamakacetiyasutta  - 125. The Gotamaka Shrine </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.125. 125. Gotamakacetiyasutta  - 125. The Gotamaka Shrine </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">13. Kusināravagga  - 13. Kusināra </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati gotamake cetiye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Gotamaka Tree-shrine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Abhiññāyāhaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammaṃ desemi, no anabhiññāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, I teach based on direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sanidānāhaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammaṃ desemi, no anidānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I teach with reasons, not without them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṭihāriyāhaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammaṃ desemi, no appāṭihāriyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I teach with a demonstrable basis, not without it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, abhiññāya dhammaṃ desayato no anabhiññāya, sanidānaṃ dhammaṃ desayato no anidānaṃ, sappāṭihāriyaṃ dhammaṃ desayato no appāṭihāriyaṃ, karaṇīyo ovādo, karaṇīyā anusāsanī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Since this is so, you should follow my advice and instruction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alañca pana vo, bhikkhave, tuṭṭhiyā, alaṃ attamanatāya, alaṃ somanassāya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is enough for you to feel joyful, delighted, and happy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sammāsambuddho bhagavā, svākkhāto dhammo, suppaṭipanno saṃgho’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha! The teaching is well explained! The Saṅgha is practicing well!’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imasmiñca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne sahassī lokadhātu akampitthāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And while this discourse was being spoken, the galaxy shook. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
