<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.094-94. Saradasutta  - 94. Springtime </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.094. 94. Saradasutta  - 94. Springtime </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">10. Loṇakapallavagga  - 10. A Lump of Salt </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, saradasamaye viddhe vigatavalāhake deve ādicco nabhaṃ abbhussakkamāno sabbaṃ ākāsagataṃ tamagataṃ abhivihacca bhāsate ca tapate ca virocati ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“After the rainy season the sky is clear and cloudless. And when the sun rises, it dispels all the darkness from the sky as it shines and glows and radiates. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, yato ariyasāvakassa virajaṃ vītamalaṃ dhammacakkhuṃ uppajjati, saha dassanuppādā, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa tīṇi saṃyojanāni pahīyanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when the stainless, immaculate vision of the teaching arises in a noble disciple, three fetters are given up: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkāyadiṭṭhi, vicikicchā, sīlabbataparāmāso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">identity view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athāparaṃ dvīhi dhammehi niyyāti abhijjhāya ca byāpādena ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Afterwards they get rid of two things: desire and aversion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiñce, bhikkhave, samaye ariyasāvako kālaṃ kareyya, natthi taṃ saṃyojanaṃ yena saṃyojanena saṃyutto ariyasāvako puna imaṃ lokaṃ āgaccheyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If that noble disciple passed away at that time, they’re bound by no fetter that might return them to this world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
