<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.003-3. Cintīsutta  - 3. Thinking </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.003. 3. Cintīsutta  - 3. Thinking </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bālavagga  - 1. Fools </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, bālassa bālalakkhaṇāni bālanimittāni bālāpadānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of a fool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bālo duccintitacintī ca hoti dubbhāsitabhāsī ca dukkaṭakammakārī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fool thinks poorly, speaks poorly, and acts poorly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No cedaṃ, bhikkhave, bālo duccintitacintī ca abhavissa dubbhāsitabhāsī ca dukkaṭakammakārī ca, kena naṃ paṇḍitā jāneyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If a fool didn’t think poorly, speak poorly, and act poorly, then how would the astute know of them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bālo ayaṃ bhavaṃ asappuriso’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This fellow is a fool, a bad person’? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, bālo duccintitacintī ca hoti dubbhāsitabhāsī ca dukkaṭakammakārī ca tasmā naṃ paṇḍitā jānanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since a fool does think poorly, speak poorly, and act poorly, then the astute do know of them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bālo ayaṃ bhavaṃ asappuriso’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This fellow is a fool, a bad person’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi bālassa bālalakkhaṇāni bālanimittāni bālāpadānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of a fool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīṇimāni, bhikkhave, paṇḍitassa paṇḍitalakkhaṇāni paṇḍitanimittāni paṇḍitāpadānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of an astute person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni tīṇi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, paṇḍito sucintitacintī ca hoti subhāsitabhāsī ca sukatakammakārī ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An astute person thinks well, speaks well, and acts well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No cedaṃ, bhikkhave, paṇḍito sucintitacintī ca abhavissa subhāsitabhāsī ca sukatakammakārī ca, kena naṃ paṇḍitā jāneyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">If an astute person didn’t think well, speak well, and act well, then how would the astute know of them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇḍito ayaṃ bhavaṃ sappuriso’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This fellow is astute, a good person’? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, paṇḍito sucintitacintī ca hoti subhāsitabhāsī ca sukatakammakārī ca tasmā naṃ paṇḍitā jānanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">But since an astute person does think well, speak well, and act well, then the astute do know of them: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘paṇḍito ayaṃ bhavaṃ sappuriso’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This fellow is astute, a good person’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, tīṇi paṇḍitassa paṇḍitalakkhaṇāni paṇḍitanimittāni paṇḍitāpadānāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of an astute person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
