<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.018-18. Devalokasutta  - 18. The Realm of the Gods </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.018. 18. Devalokasutta  - 18. The Realm of the Gods </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rathakāravagga  - 2. The Chariot-maker </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace vo, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṃ puccheyyuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another path were to ask you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘devalokūpapattiyā, āvuso, samaṇe gotame brahmacariyaṃ vussathā’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Reverend, do you live the spiritual life with the ascetic Gotama so that you can be reborn in the realm of the gods?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nanu tumhe, bhikkhave, evaṃ puṭṭhā aṭṭīyeyyātha harāyeyyātha jiguccheyyāthā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being questioned like this, wouldn’t you be horrified, repelled, and disgusted?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iti kira tumhe, bhikkhave, dibbena āyunā aṭṭīyatha harāyatha jigucchatha, dibbena vaṇṇena dibbena sukhena dibbena yasena dibbenādhipateyyena aṭṭīyatha harāyatha jigucchatha; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“So it seems that you are horrified, repelled, and disgusted by divine lifespan, beauty, happiness, fame, and sovereignty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pageva kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhehi kāyaduccaritena aṭṭīyitabbaṃ harāyitabbaṃ jigucchitabbaṃ, vacīduccaritena … manoduccaritena aṭṭīyitabbaṃ harāyitabbaṃ jigucchitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How much more then should you be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted by bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
