<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.009-9. Khatasutta  - 9. Broken </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.009. 9. Khatasutta  - 9. Broken </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bālavagga  - 1. Fools </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a foolish, incompetent, bad person has three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyaduccaritena, vacīduccaritena, manoduccaritena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, sāvajjo ca hoti sānuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca apuññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a foolish, incompetent bad person has these three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much bad karma. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca puññaṃ pasavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an astute, competent good person has three qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyasucaritena, vacīsucaritena, manosucaritena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito viyatto sappuriso akkhataṃ anupahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati, anavajjo ca hoti ananuvajjo ca viññūnaṃ, bahuñca puññaṃ pasavatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an astute, competent good person has these three qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they make much merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
