<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.071-71. Channasutta  - 71. With Channa </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.071. 71. Channasutta  - 71. With Channa </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">8. Ānandavagga  - 8. Ānanda </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho channo paribbājako yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā ānandena saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Channa went up to Venerable Ānanda and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho channo paribbājako āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tumhepi, āvuso ānanda, rāgassa pahānaṃ paññāpetha, dosassa pahānaṃ paññāpetha, mohassa pahānaṃ paññāpethā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Reverend Ānanda, do you advocate giving up greed, hate, and delusion?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayaṃ kho, āvuso, rāgassa pahānaṃ paññāpema, dosassa pahānaṃ paññāpema, mohassa pahānaṃ paññapemā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“We do, reverend.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṃ pana tumhe, āvuso, rāge ādīnavaṃ disvā rāgassa pahānaṃ paññāpetha, kiṃ dose ādīnavaṃ disvā dosassa pahānaṃ paññāpetha, kiṃ mohe ādīnavaṃ disvā mohassa pahānaṃ paññāpethā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But what drawbacks have you seen, Reverend Ānanda, that you advocate giving up greed, hate, and delusion?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ratto kho, āvuso, rāgena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto attabyābādhāyapi ceteti, parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāge pahīne nevattabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na cetasikaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratto kho, āvuso, rāgena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāge pahīne neva kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, na vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, na manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When greed has been given up, they don’t do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratto kho, āvuso, rāgena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto attatthampi yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, paratthampi yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, ubhayatthampi yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A greedy person doesn’t truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāge pahīne attatthampi yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, paratthampi yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ubhayatthampi yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When greed has been given up, they truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rāgo kho, āvuso, andhakaraṇo acakkhukaraṇo aññāṇakaraṇo paññānirodhiko vighātapakkhiko anibbānasaṃvattaniko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Greed is a destroyer of sight, vision, and knowledge. It blocks wisdom, it’s on the side of anguish, and it doesn’t lead to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭho kho, āvuso, dosena … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mūḷho kho, āvuso, mohena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto attabyābādhāyapi ceteti, parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, cetasikampi dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mohe pahīne nevattabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na cetasikaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mūḷho kho, āvuso, mohena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, manasā duccaritaṃ carati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mohe pahīne neva kāyena duccaritaṃ carati, na vācāya duccaritaṃ carati, na manasā duccaritaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When delusion has been given up, they don’t do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mūḷho kho, āvuso, mohena abhibhūto pariyādinnacitto attatthampi yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, paratthampi yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, ubhayatthampi yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">A deluded person doesn’t truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mohe pahīne attatthampi yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, paratthampi yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ubhayatthampi yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When delusion has been given up, they truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Moho kho, āvuso, andhakaraṇo acakkhukaraṇo aññāṇakaraṇo paññānirodhiko vighātapakkhiko anibbānasaṃvattaniko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Delusion is a destroyer of sight, vision, and knowledge; it blocks wisdom, it’s on the side of anguish, and it doesn’t lead to extinguishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho mayaṃ, āvuso, rāge ādīnavaṃ disvā rāgassa pahānaṃ paññāpema. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the drawback we’ve seen in greed, hate, and delusion, and this is why we advocate giving them up.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ dose ādīnavaṃ disvā dosassa pahānaṃ paññāpema. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ mohe ādīnavaṃ disvā mohassa pahānaṃ paññāpemā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi panāvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But, reverend, is there a path and a practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthāvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, reverend, a path and a practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Katamo panāvuso, maggo katamā paṭipadā etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, what is it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the path, this is the practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhaddako kho, āvuso, maggo bhaddikā paṭipadā etassa rāgassa dosassa mohassa pahānāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“This is a fine path, a fine practice, for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alañca panāvuso ānanda, appamādāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Just this much is enough to be diligent.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
