<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.020-20. Dutiyapāpaṇikasutta  - 20. A Shopkeeper (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.020. 20. Dutiyapāpaṇikasutta  - 20. A Shopkeeper (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Rathakāravagga  - 2. The Chariot-maker </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato pāpaṇiko nacirasseva mahattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti bhogesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a shopkeeper who has three factors soon acquires great and abundant wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko cakkhumā ca hoti vidhuro ca nissayasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a shopkeeper sees clearly, is responsible, and has supporters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko cakkhumā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a shopkeeper see clearly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko paṇiyaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a shopkeeper knows of a product: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ paṇiyaṃ evaṃ kītaṃ, evaṃ vikkayamānaṃ, ettakaṃ mūlaṃ bhavissati, ettako udayo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This product is bought at this price and is selling at this price. With this much investment, it’ll bring this much profit.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko cakkhumā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a shopkeeper sees clearly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko vidhuro hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a shopkeeper responsible? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko kusalo hoti paṇiyaṃ ketuñca vikketuñca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a shopkeeper is a skilled in buying and selling products. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko vidhuro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a shopkeeper is responsible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko nissayasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a shopkeeper have supporters? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, pāpaṇikaṃ ye te gahapatī vā gahapatiputtā vā aḍḍhā mahaddhanā mahābhogā te evaṃ jānanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when rich, affluent, and wealthy householders or householders’ children know of him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṃ kho bhavaṃ pāpaṇiko cakkhumā vidhuro ca paṭibalo puttadārañca posetuṃ, amhākañca kālena kālaṃ anuppadātun’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This good shopkeeper keeps an eye out and is responsible. They are capable of providing for their wives and children, and paying us back from time to time.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te naṃ bhogehi nipatanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They deposit money with the shopkeeper, saying: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ito, samma pāpaṇika, bhoge karitvā puttadārañca posehi, amhākañca kālena kālaṃ anuppadehī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘With this, friend shopkeeper, earn money to raise your wives and children, and pay us back from time to time.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pāpaṇiko nissayasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a shopkeeper has supporters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi aṅgehi samannāgato pāpaṇiko nacirasseva mahattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti bhogesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A shopkeeper who has these three factors soon acquires great and abundant wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nacirasseva mahattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti kusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant who has three factors soon acquires great and abundant skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhumā ca hoti vidhuro ca nissayasampanno ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant sees clearly, is responsible, and has supporters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhumā hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant see clearly? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhumā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant sees clearly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vidhuro hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a mendicant responsible? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya, thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vidhuro hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant is responsible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nissayasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a mendicant have supporters? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ye te bhikkhū bahussutā āgatāgamā dhammadharā vinayadharā mātikādharā te kālena kālaṃ upasaṅkamitvā paripucchati paripañhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when from time to time a mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned—knowledgeable in the scriptures, who have memorized the teachings, the texts on monastic training, and the outlines—and asks them questions: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘idaṃ, bhante, kathaṃ, imassa ko attho’ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa te āyasmanto avivaṭañceva vivaranti, anuttānīkatañca uttānīkaronti, anekavihitesu ca kaṅkhāṭhāniyesu dhammesu kaṅkhaṃ paṭivinodenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nissayasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a mendicant has supporters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu nacirasseva mahattaṃ vepullattaṃ pāpuṇāti kusalesu dhammesū”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant who has these three factors soon acquires great and abundant skillful qualities.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rathakāravaggo dutiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamabhāṇavāro niṭṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The first recitation section is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñāto sāraṇīyo bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkavattī sacetano; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaṇṇakattā devo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">duve pāpaṇikena cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
