<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.027-27. Jigucchitabbasutta  - 27. Offensive </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.027. 27. Jigucchitabbasutta  - 27. Offensive </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Puggalavagga  - 3. Persons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These three people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, puggalo jigucchitabbo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a person who you should be disgusted by, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, puggalo ajjhupekkhitabbo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a person you should regard with equanimity, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthi, bhikkhave, puggalo sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There is a person you should associate with, accompany, and attend. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo jigucchitabbo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the person you should be disgusted by, and not associate with, accompany, or attend? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo dussīlo hoti pāpadhammo asuci saṅkassarasamācāro paṭicchannakammanto, assamaṇo samaṇapaṭiñño, abrahmacārī brahmacāripaṭiñño, antopūti avassuto kasambujāto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who is unethical, of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner—though claiming to be one—rotten inside, corrupt, and depraved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpo, bhikkhave, puggalo jigucchitabbo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should be disgusted by such a person, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñcāpi, bhikkhave, evarūpassa puggalassa na diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati, atha kho naṃ pāpako kittisaddo abbhuggacchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even if you don’t follow the example of such a person, you still get a bad reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pāpamitto purisapuggalo pāpasahāyo pāpasampavaṅko’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That individual has bad friends, companions, and associates.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ahi gūthagato kiñcāpi na daṃsati, atha kho naṃ makkheti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re like a snake that’s been living in a pile of dung. Even if it doesn’t bite, it’ll still rub off on you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, kiñcāpi evarūpassa puggalassa na diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati, atha kho naṃ pāpako kittisaddo abbhuggacchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, even if you don’t follow the example of such a person, you still get a bad reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘pāpamitto purisapuggalo pāpasahāyo pāpasampavaṅko’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That individual has bad friends, companions, and associates.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā evarūpo puggalo jigucchitabbo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should be disgusted by such a person, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo ajjhupekkhitabbo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the person you should regard with equanimity, and not associate with, accompany, or attend? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo kodhano hoti upāyāsabahulo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a person who is irritable and bad-tempered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appampi vutto samāno abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati, kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, duṭṭhāruko kaṭṭhena vā kaṭhalāya vā ghaṭṭito bhiyyoso mattāya āsavaṃ deti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re like a festering sore, which, when you hit it with a stick or a stone, discharges even more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, someone is irritable and bad-tempered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, tindukālātaṃ kaṭṭhena vā kaṭhalāya vā ghaṭṭitaṃ bhiyyoso mattāya cicciṭāyati ciṭiciṭāyati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re like a firebrand of pale-moon ebony, which, when you hit it with a stick or a stone, sizzles and crackles even more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, someone is irritable and bad-tempered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gūthakūpo kaṭṭhena vā kaṭhalāya vā ghaṭṭito bhiyyoso mattāya duggandho hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re like a sewer, which, when you stir it with a stick or a stone, stinks even more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco puggalo kodhano hoti upāyāsabahulo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, someone is irritable and bad-tempered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appampi vutto samāno abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati, kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpo, bhikkhave, puggalo ajjhupekkhitabbo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should regard such a person with equanimity, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkoseyyapi maṃ paribhāseyyapi maṃ anatthampi maṃ kareyyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thinking, ‘They might abuse or insult me, or do me harm.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā evarūpo puggalo ajjhupekkhitabbo na sevitabbo na bhajitabbo na payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should regard such a person with equanimity, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the person you should associate with, accompany, and attend? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco puggalo sīlavā hoti kalyāṇadhammo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who is ethical, of good character. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpo, bhikkhave, puggalo sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should associate with, accompany, and attend such a person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñcāpi, bhikkhave, evarūpassa puggalassa na diṭṭhānugatiṃ āpajjati, atha kho naṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggacchati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even if you don’t follow the example of such a person, you still get a good reputation: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kalyāṇamitto purisapuggalo kalyāṇasahāyo kalyāṇasampavaṅko’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘That individual has good friends, companions, and associates.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā evarūpo puggalo sevitabbo bhajitabbo payirupāsitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why you should associate with, accompany, and attend such a person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasminti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three people found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nihīyati puriso nihīnasevī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man who associates with an inferior goes downhill, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca hāyetha kadāci tulyasevī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">but associating with an equal, you’ll never decline; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seṭṭhamupanamaṃ udeti khippaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">following the best, you’ll quickly rise up, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā attano uttariṃ bhajethā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so you should keep company with people better than you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
