<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.051-51. Paṭhamadvebrāhmaṇasutta  - 51. Two Brahmins (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.051. 51. Paṭhamadvebrāhmaṇasutta  - 51. Two Brahmins (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 6. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho dve brāhmaṇā jiṇṇā vuddhā mahallakā addhagatā vayoanuppattā vīsavassasatikā jātiyā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then two old brahmins—elderly and senior, who were advanced in years and had reached the final stage of life, a hundred and twenty years old—went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te brāhmaṇā bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mayamassu, bho gotama, brāhmaṇā jiṇṇā vuddhā mahallakā addhagatā vayoanuppattā vīsavassasatikā jātiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“We brahmins, Master Gotama, are old, elderly and senior, we’re advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; we’re a hundred and twenty years old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te camhā akatakalyāṇā akatakusalā akatabhīruttāṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And we haven’t done what is good and skillful, nor have we made a shelter from fear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovadatu no bhavaṃ gotamo, anusāsatu no bhavaṃ gotamo yaṃ amhākaṃ assa dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Advise us, Master Gotama, instruct us! It will be for our lasting welfare and happiness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taggha tumhe, brāhmaṇā, jiṇṇā vuddhā mahallakā addhagatā vayoanuppattā vīsavassasatikā jātiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Indeed, brahmins, you’re old, elderly and senior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te cattha akatakalyāṇā akatakusalā akatabhīruttāṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And you haven’t done what is good and skillful, nor have you made a shelter from fear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upanīyati kho ayaṃ, brāhmaṇā, loko jarāya byādhinā maraṇena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This world is led on by old age, sickness, and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ upanīyamāne kho, brāhmaṇā, loke jarāya byādhinā maraṇena, yo idha kāyena saṃyamo vācāya saṃyamo manasā saṃyamo, taṃ tassa petassa tāṇañca leṇañca dīpañca saraṇañca parāyaṇañcāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But restraint here by way of body, speech, and mind is the shelter, protection, island, refuge, and haven for the departed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upanīyati jīvitamappamāyu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This life, so very short, is led onward. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jarūpanītassa na santi tāṇā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’s no shelter for someone who’s been led on by old age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṃ bhayaṃ maraṇe pekkhamāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seeing this peril in death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññāni kayirātha sukhāvahāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should do good deeds that bring happiness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yodha kāyena saṃyamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The restraint practiced here—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vācāya uda cetasā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of body, speech, and mind—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ tassa petassa sukhāya hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">leads the departed to happiness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ jīvamāno pakaroti puññan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as the good deeds done while living.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
