<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.057-57. Vacchagottasutta  - 57. With Vacchagotta </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.057. 57. Vacchagottasutta  - 57. With Vacchagotta </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Brāhmaṇavagga  - 6. Brahmins </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho vacchagotto paribbājako yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho vacchagotto paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sutaṃ metaṃ, bho gotama, samaṇo gotamo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have heard, Master Gotama, that the ascetic Gotama says this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mayhameva dānaṃ dātabbaṃ, nāññesaṃ dānaṃ dātabbaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Gifts should only be given to me, not to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mayhameva sāvakānaṃ dānaṃ dātabbaṃ, nāññesaṃ sāvakānaṃ dānaṃ dātabbaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gifts should only be given to my disciples, not to the disciples of others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mayhameva dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ, nāññesaṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Only what is given to me is very fruitful, not what is given to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mayhameva sāvakānaṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ, nāññesaṃ sāvakānaṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Only what is given to my disciples is very fruitful, not what is given to the disciples of others.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te, bho gotama, evamāhaṃsu ‘samaṇo gotamo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mayhameva dānaṃ dātabbaṃ, nāññesaṃ dānaṃ dātabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayhameva sāvakānaṃ dānaṃ dātabbaṃ, nāññesaṃ sāvakānaṃ dānaṃ dātabbaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayhameva dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ, nāññesaṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayhameva sāvakānaṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ, nāññesaṃ sāvakānaṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalan”’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci te bhoto gotamassa vuttavādino na ca bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ abhūtena abbhācikkhanti, dhammassa cānudhammaṃ byākaronti, na ca koci sahadhammiko vādānupāto gārayhaṃ ṭhānaṃ āgacchati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">I trust that those who say this repeat what the Buddha has said, and do not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuke and criticism? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anabbhakkhātukāmā hi mayaṃ bhavantaṃ gotaman”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For we don’t want to misrepresent Master Gotama.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye te, vaccha, evamāhaṃsu: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Vaccha, those who say this </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘samaṇo gotamo evamāha: </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mayhameva dānaṃ dātabbaṃ … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāññesaṃ sāvakānaṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalan”’ti </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na me te vuttavādino. Abbhācikkhanti ca pana maṃ asatā abhūtena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">do not repeat what I have said. They misrepresent me with what is false and untrue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, vaccha, paraṃ dānaṃ dadantaṃ vāreti so tiṇṇaṃ antarāyakaro hoti, tiṇṇaṃ pāripanthiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who prevents another from giving makes an obstacle and a barrier for three people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamesaṃ tiṇṇaṃ? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dāyakassa puññantarāyakaro hoti, paṭiggāhakānaṃ lābhantarāyakaro hoti, pubbeva kho panassa attā khato ca hoti upahato ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The giver is obstructed from making merit. The receiver is obstructed from getting what is offered. And they’ve already broken and damaged themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kho, vaccha, paraṃ dānaṃ dadantaṃ vāreti so imesaṃ tiṇṇaṃ antarāyakaro hoti, tiṇṇaṃ pāripanthiko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Anyone who prevents another from giving makes an obstacle and a barrier for these three people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahaṃ kho pana, vaccha, evaṃ vadāmi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Vaccha, this is what I say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ye hi te candanikāya vā oligalle vā pāṇā, tatrapi yo thālidhovanaṃ vā sarāvadhovanaṃ vā chaḍḍeti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘You even make merit by tipping out dish-washing water in a cesspool or a sump with living creatures in it, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ye tattha pāṇā te tena yāpentū”’ti, tato nidānampāhaṃ, vaccha, puññassa āgamaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“May any creatures here be nourished!”’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko pana vādo manussabhūte. </span></p>
<p class="p3">How much more then for human beings! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Api cāhaṃ, vaccha, sīlavato dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ vadāmi, no tathā dussīlassa, so ca hoti pañcaṅgavippahīno pañcaṅgasamannāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">However, I also say that a gift to an ethical person is more fruitful than one to an unethical person. They’ve given up five factors, and possess five factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni pañcaṅgāni pahīnāni honti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five factors they’ve given up? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmacchando pahīno hoti, byāpādo pahīno hoti, thinamiddhaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, uddhaccakukkuccaṃ pahīnaṃ hoti, vicikicchā pahīnā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni pañcaṅgāni vippahīnāni honti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five factors they’ve given up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi pañcahi aṅgehi samannāgato hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What are the five factors they possess? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asekkhena sīlakkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekkhena samādhikkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekkhena paññākkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekkhena vimuttikkhandhena samannāgato hoti, asekkhena vimuttiñāṇadassanakkhandhena samannāgato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The entire spectrum of an adept’s ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of freedom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi pañcahi aṅgehi samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the five factors they possess. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti pañcaṅgavippahīne pañcaṅgasamannāgate dinnaṃ mahapphalanti vadāmīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that a gift to anyone who has given up these five factors and possesses these five factors is very fruitful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti kaṇhāsu setāsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Cows may be black or white, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rohiṇīsu harīsu vā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">red or tawny, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammāsāsu sarūpāsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">mottled or uniform, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gosu pārevatāsu vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or pigeon-colored. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāsu kāsuci etāsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But when one is born among them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">danto jāyati puṅgavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the bull that’s tamed </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhorayho balasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">—a behemoth, powerful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇajavanikkamo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">well-paced in pulling forward—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tameva bhāre yuñjanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they yoke the load just to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāssa vaṇṇaṃ parikkhare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">regardless of his color. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ manussesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So it is for humans, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yasmiṃ kasmiñci jātiye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever they may be born </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khattiye brāhmaṇe vesse, </span></p>
<p class="p3">—among aristocrats, brahmins, merchants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sudde caṇḍālapukkuse. </span></p>
<p class="p3">workers, or outcastes and scavengers—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāsu kāsuci etāsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">one is born among them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">danto jāyati subbato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">tamed, true to their vows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaṭṭho sīlasampanno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saccavādī hirīmano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">truthful, conscientious, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahīnajātimaraṇo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve given up birth and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacariyassa kevalī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Complete in the spiritual journey, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pannabhāro visaṃyutto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with burden put down, detached, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katakicco anāsavo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ve completed the task and are free of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāragū sabbadhammānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gone beyond all things, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupādāya nibbuto; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re extinguished by not grasping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṃyeva viraje khette, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In that flawless field, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vipulā hoti dakkhiṇā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a religious donation is abundant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bālā ca avijānantā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fools who don’t understand </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dummedhā assutāvino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">—stupid, uneducated—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahiddhā denti dānāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">give their gifts to those outside, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na hi sante upāsare. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and don’t attend the peaceful ones. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca sante upāsanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But those who do attend the peaceful ones </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappaññe dhīrasammate; </span></p>
<p class="p3">—wise, esteemed as sages—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhā ca nesaṃ sugate, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and whose faith in the Holy One </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mūlajātā patiṭṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">has roots planted deep, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devalokañca te yanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they go to the realm of the gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kule vā idha jāyare; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or are born here in a good family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupubbena nibbānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Gradually those astute ones </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhigacchanti paṇḍitā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">reach extinguishment.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
