<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.119-119. Kammantasutta  - 119. Action </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.119. 119. Kammantasutta  - 119. Action </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">12. Āpāyikavagga  - 12. Bound for Loss </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vipattiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are three failures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammantavipatti, ājīvavipatti, diṭṭhivipatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Failure in action, livelihood, and view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, kammantavipatti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is failure in action? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātī hoti … pe … samphappalāpī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammantavipatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘failure in action’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, ājīvavipatti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is failure in livelihood? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco micchāājīvo hoti, micchāājīvena jīvikaṃ kappeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has wrong livelihood and earns a living by wrong livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ājīvavipatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘failure in livelihood’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, diṭṭhivipatti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is failure in view? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco micchādiṭṭhiko hoti viparītadassano: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone has wrong view, a distorted perspective, such as: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi dinnaṃ, natthi yiṭṭhaṃ … pe … ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no obligation to mother and father. No beings are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is well attained and practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, diṭṭhivipatti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘failure in view’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso vipattiyoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three failures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tisso imā, bhikkhave, sampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are three accomplishments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā tisso? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammantasampadā, ājīvasampadā, diṭṭhisampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Accomplishment in action, livelihood, and view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, kammantasampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in action? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti … pe … samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammantasampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘accomplishment in action’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, ājīvasampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in livelihood? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sammāājīvo hoti, sammāājīvena jīvikaṃ kappeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple has right livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ājīvasampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘accomplishment in livelihood’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamā ca, bhikkhave, diṭṭhisampadā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what is accomplishment in view? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sammādiṭṭhiko hoti aviparītadassano: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when someone has right view, an undistorted perspective, such as: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘atthi dinnaṃ, atthi yiṭṭhaṃ … pe … ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There is obligation to mother and father. There are beings reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are well attained and practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, diṭṭhisampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called ‘accomplishment in view’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso sampadā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three accomplishments.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
