<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.005-5. Ayonisosutta  - 5. Improper </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.005. 5. Ayonisosutta  - 5. Improper </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bālavagga  - 1. Fools </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bālo veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A fool is known by three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayoniso pañhaṃ kattā hoti, ayoniso pañhaṃ vissajjetā hoti, parassa kho pana yoniso pañhaṃ vissajjitaṃ parimaṇḍalehi padabyañjanehi siliṭṭhehi upagatehi nābbhanumoditā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They ask a question improperly. They answer a question improperly. And when someone else answers a question properly—with well-rounded, coherent, and relevant words and phrases—they disagree with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bālo veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things by which a fool is known. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An astute person is known by three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yoniso pañhaṃ kattā hoti, yoniso pañhaṃ vissajjetā hoti, parassa kho pana yoniso pañhaṃ vissajjitaṃ parimaṇḍalehi padabyañjanehi siliṭṭhehi upagatehi abbhanumoditā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They ask a question properly. They answer a question properly. And when someone else answers a question properly—with well-rounded, coherent, and relevant words and phrases—they agree with it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things by which an astute person is known. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
