<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.004-4. Accayasutta  - 4. Mistakes </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.004. 4. Accayasutta  - 4. Mistakes </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Bālavagga  - 1. Fools </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bālo veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A fool is known by three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accayaṃ accayato na passati, accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ nappaṭikaroti, parassa kho pana accayaṃ desentassa yathādhammaṃ nappaṭiggaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t recognize when they’ve made a mistake. When they do recognize it they don’t deal with it properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they don’t accept it properly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bālo veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things by which a fool is known. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">An astute person is known by three things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi tīhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Accayaṃ accayato passati, accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ paṭikaroti, parassa kho pana accayaṃ desentassa yathādhammaṃ paṭiggaṇhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They recognize when they’ve made a mistake. When they recognize it they deal with it properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they accept it properly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato paṇḍito veditabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three things by which an astute person is known. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
