<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.082-82. Gadrabhasutta  - 82. The Donkey </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.082. 82. Gadrabhasutta  - 82. The Donkey </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Samaṇavagga  - 9. Ascetics </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gadrabho gogaṇaṃ piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandho hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Suppose, mendicants, a donkey followed behind a herd of cattle, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahampi dammo, ahampi dammo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I can moo too! I can moo too!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa na tādiso vaṇṇo hoti seyyathāpi gunnaṃ, na tādiso saro hoti seyyathāpi gunnaṃ, na tādisaṃ padaṃ hoti seyyathāpi gunnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But it doesn’t look like a cow, or sound like a cow, or leave a footprint like a cow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So gogaṇaṃyeva piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandho hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Still it follows behind a herd of cattle, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahampi dammo, ahampi dammo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I can moo too! I can moo too!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco bhikkhu bhikkhusaṅghaṃ piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandho hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, some mendicant follows behind the mendicant Saṅgha, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahampi bhikkhu, ahampi bhikkhū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’m a monk too! I’m a monk too!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa na tādiso chando hoti adhisīlasikkhāsamādāne seyyathāpi aññesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ, na tādiso chando hoti adhicittasikkhāsamādāne seyyathāpi aññesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ, na tādiso chando hoti adhipaññāsikkhāsamādāne seyyathāpi aññesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t have the same enthusiasm for undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom as the other mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhusaṅghaṃyeva piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandho hoti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Still they follow behind the mendicant Saṇgha, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahampi bhikkhu, ahampi bhikkhū’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’m a monk too! I’m a monk too!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">So you should train like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tibbo no chando bhavissati adhisīlasikkhāsamādāne, tibbo no chando bhavissati adhicittasikkhāsamādāne, tibbo no chando bhavissati adhipaññāsikkhāsamādāne’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘We will have keen enthusiasm for undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
