<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>3.029-29. Andhasutta  - 29. Blind </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">3.029. 29. Andhasutta  - 29. Blind </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Puggalavagga  - 3. Persons </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tayome, bhikkhave, puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“These three kinds of people are found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame tayo? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What three? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andho, ekacakkhu, dvicakkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The blind, the one-eyed, and the two-eyed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo andho? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the blind person? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa tathārūpaṃ cakkhu na hoti yathārūpena cakkhunā anadhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ adhigaccheyya adhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ phātiṃ kareyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who doesn’t have the kind of vision that’s needed to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathārūpampissa cakkhu na hoti yathārūpena cakkhunā kusalākusale dhamme jāneyya, sāvajjānavajje dhamme jāneyya, hīnappaṇīte dhamme jāneyya, kaṇhasukkasappaṭibhāge dhamme jāneyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor do they have the kind of vision that’s needed to know the difference between qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side of dark and bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo andho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a blind person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo ekacakkhu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the person with one eye? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa tathārūpaṃ cakkhu hoti yathārūpena cakkhunā anadhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ adhigaccheyya adhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ phātiṃ kareyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has the kind of vision that’s needed to acquire more wealth and to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathārūpaṃ panassa cakkhu na hoti yathārūpena cakkhunā kusalākusale dhamme jāneyya, sāvajjānavajje dhamme jāneyya, hīnappaṇīte dhamme jāneyya, kaṇhasukkasappaṭibhāge dhamme jāneyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But they don’t have the kind of vision that’s needed to know the difference between qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side of dark and bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo ekacakkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a one-eyed person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo ca, bhikkhave, puggalo dvicakkhu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is the person with two eyes? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa tathārūpaṃ cakkhu hoti yathārūpena cakkhunā anadhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ adhigaccheyya, adhigataṃ vā bhogaṃ phātiṃ kareyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s someone who has the kind of vision that’s needed to acquire more wealth and to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathārūpampissa cakkhu hoti yathārūpena cakkhunā kusalākusale dhamme jāneyya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And they have the kind of vision that’s needed to know the difference between skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, or qualities on the side of dark and bright. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāvajjānavajje dhamme jāneyya, hīnappaṇīte dhamme jāneyya, kaṇhasukkasappaṭibhāge dhamme jāneyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, puggalo dvicakkhu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is called a two-eyed person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, tayo puggalā santo saṃvijjamānā lokasminti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the three people found in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ceva bhogā tathārūpā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Neither suitable wealth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca puññāni kubbati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor merit do they make. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhayattha kaliggāho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They lose on both counts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">andhassa hatacakkhuno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those who are blind, with ruined eyes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Athāparāyaṃ akkhāto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And now the one-eyed </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekacakkhu ca puggalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">person is explained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammādhammena saṭhoso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By methods good and bad, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhogāni pariyesati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that devious person seeks wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Theyyena kūṭakammena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Both by fraudulent, thieving deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādena cūbhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and also by lies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kusalo hoti saṅghātuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the young man’s skilled at piling up money, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāmabhogī ca mānavo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and enjoying sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ito so nirayaṃ gantvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">From here they go to hell—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekacakkhu vihaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the one-eyed person is ruined. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvicakkhu pana akkhāto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And now the two-eyed is explained, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seṭṭho purisapuggalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the best individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammaladdhehi bhogehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their wealth is earned legitimately, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uṭṭhānādhigataṃ dhanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">money acquired by their own hard work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadāti seṭṭhasaṅkappo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They give with best of intentions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abyaggamānaso naro; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that peaceful-hearted person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upeti bhaddakaṃ ṭhānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They go to a good place, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha gantvā na socati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where there is no sorrow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Andhañca ekacakkhuñca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The blind and the one-eyed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārakā parivajjaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should avoid from afar. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvicakkhuṃ pana sevetha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But you should keep the two-eyed close, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seṭṭhaṃ purisapuggalan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the best individual.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
