<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.088-88. Appasādapavedanīyasutta  - 88. A Proclamation of No Confidence </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.088. 88. Appasādapavedanīyasutta  - 88. A Proclamation of No Confidence </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sativagga  - 9. Mindfulness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgatassa bhikkhuno ākaṅkhamānā upāsakā appasādaṃ pavedeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the lay followers may, if they wish, make a proclamation of no confidence in a mendicant who has eight qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihīnaṃ alābhāya parisakkati, gihīnaṃ anatthāya parisakkati, gihī akkosati paribhāsati, gihī gihīhi bhedeti, buddhassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, dhammassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, saṃghassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, agocare ca naṃ passanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They try to prevent the lay people from getting material possessions. They try to harm lay people. They insult and abuse lay people. They divide lay people against each other. They criticize the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They’re seen at an inappropriate place for collecting alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgatassa bhikkhuno ākaṅkhamānā upāsakā appasādaṃ pavedeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The lay followers may, if they wish, make a proclamation of no confidence in a mendicant who has these eight qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgatassa bhikkhuno ākaṅkhamānā upāsakā pasādaṃ pavedeyyuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The lay followers may, if they wish, make a proclamation of confidence in a mendicant who has eight qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na gihīnaṃ alābhāya parisakkati, na gihīnaṃ anatthāya parisakkati, na gihī akkosati paribhāsati, na gihī gihīhi bhedeti, buddhassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, dhammassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, saṅghassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, gocare ca naṃ passanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t try to prevent the lay people from getting material possessions. They don’t try to harm lay people. They don’t insult and abuse lay people. They don’t divide lay people against each other. They don’t criticize the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They’re not seen at an inappropriate place for collecting alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgatassa bhikkhuno ākaṅkhamānā upāsakā pasādaṃ pavedeyyun”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The lay followers may, if they wish, make a proclamation of confidence in a mendicant who has these eight qualities.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
