<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.052-52. Ovādasutta  - 52. An Adviser for Nuns </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.052. 52. Ovādasutta  - 52. An Adviser for Nuns </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Gotamīvagga  - 6. Gotamī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katihi nu kho, bhante, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu bhikkhunovādako sammannitabbo”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how many qualities should a monk have to be agreed on as an adviser for nuns?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi kho, ānanda, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu bhikkhunovādako sammannitabbo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, a monk with eight qualities may be agreed on as an adviser for nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhānanda, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a monk is ethical, restrained in the code of conduct, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto hoti … pe … diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and understanding them with right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhayāni kho panassa pātimokkhāni vitthārena svāgatāni honti suvibhattāni suppavattīni suvinicchitāni suttaso anubyañjanaso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well judged in both the rules and accompanying material. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇavāco hoti kalyāṇavākkaraṇo, poriyā vācāya samannāgato vissaṭṭhāya anelagaḷāya atthassa viññāpaniyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the meaning. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibalo hoti bhikkhunisaṃghassa dhammiyā kathāya sandassetuṃ samādapetuṃ samuttejetuṃ sampahaṃsetuṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re able to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the community of nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena bhikkhunīnaṃ piyo hoti manāpo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re likable and agreeable to most of the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kho panetaṃ bhagavantaṃ uddissa pabbajitāya kāsāyavatthavasanāya garudhammaṃ ajjhāpannapubbo hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have never previously sexually harassed any woman wearing the ocher robe who has gone forth in the Buddha’s name. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīsativasso vā hoti atirekavīsativasso vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They have been ordained for twenty years or more. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, ānanda, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu bhikkhunovādako sammannitabbo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk with these eight qualities may be agreed on as an adviser for nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
