<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.120-120  - 120 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.120. 120  - 120 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Rāgapeyyāla  - 11. Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rāgassa, bhikkhave, abhiññāya aṭṭha dhammā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“For insight into greed, eight things should be developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpī rūpāni passati, ajjhattaṃ arūpasaññī bahiddhā rūpāni passati, subhanteva adhimutto hoti, sabbaso rūpasaññānaṃ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānaṃ atthaṅgamā nānattasaññānaṃ amanasikārā ‘ananto ākāso’ti ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati, sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘anantaṃ viññāṇan’ti viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati, sabbaso viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘natthi kiñcī’ti ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati, sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati, sabbaso nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ upasampajja viharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Having physical form, they see visions … not perceiving form internally, they see visions externally … they’re focused only on beauty … going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space … going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness … going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness … going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception … going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāgassa, bhikkhave, abhiññāya ime aṭṭha dhammā bhāvetabbā”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For insight into greed, these eight things should be developed.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
