<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.053-53. Saṅkhittasutta  - 53. Brief Advice to Gotamī </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.053. 53. Saṅkhittasutta  - 53. Brief Advice to Gotamī </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Gotamīvagga  - 6. Gotamī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahāpajāpatī gotamī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṃ ṭhitā kho sā mahāpajāpatī gotamī bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṃ desetu, yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā ekā vūpakaṭṭhā appamattā ātāpinī pahitattā vihareyyan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye kho tvaṃ, gotami, dhamme jāneyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Gotamī, you might know that certain things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ime dhammā sarāgāya saṃvattanti, no virāgāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">lead to passion, not dispassion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṃyogāya saṃvattanti, no visaṃyogāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to being fettered, not to being unfettered; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ācayāya saṃvattanti, no apacayāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to accumulation, not dispersal; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahicchatāya saṃvattanti, no appicchatāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to more desires, not fewer; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asantuṭṭhiyā saṃvattanti, no santuṭṭhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to lack of contentment, not contentment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgaṇikāya saṃvattanti, no pavivekāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to crowding, not seclusion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosajjāya saṃvattanti, no vīriyārambhāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to laziness, not energy; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbharatāya saṃvattanti, no subharatāyā’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">to being hard to look after, not being easy to look after. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃsena, gotami, dhāreyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should definitely bear in mind that these things are </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘neso dhammo, neso vinayo, netaṃ satthusāsanan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not the teaching, not the training, and not the Teacher’s instructions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca kho tvaṃ, gotami, dhamme jāneyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You might know that certain things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ime dhammā virāgāya saṃvattanti, no sarāgāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">lead to dispassion, not passion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">visaṃyogāya saṃvattanti, no saṃyogāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to being unfettered, not to being fettered; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apacayāya saṃvattanti, no ācayāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to dispersal, not accumulation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appicchatāya saṃvattanti, no mahicchatāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to fewer desires, not more; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santuṭṭhiyā saṃvattanti, no asantuṭṭhiyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to contentment, not lack of contentment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavivekāya saṃvattanti, no saṅgaṇikāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to seclusion, not crowding; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīriyārambhāya saṃvattanti, no kosajjāya; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to energy, not laziness; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">subharatāya saṃvattanti, no dubbharatāyā’ti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">to being easy to look after, not being hard to look after. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃsena, gotami, dhāreyyāsi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should definitely bear in mind that these things are </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘eso dhammo, eso vinayo, etaṃ satthusāsanan’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the teaching, the training, and the Teacher’s instructions.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
