<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.001-1. Mettāsutta  - 1. The Benefits of Love </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.001. 1. Mettāsutta  - 1. The Benefits of Love </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Mettāvagga  - 1. Love </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mettāya, bhikkhave, cetovimuttiyā āsevitāya bhāvitāya bahulīkatāya yānīkatāya vatthukatāya anuṭṭhitāya paricitāya susamāraddhāya aṭṭhānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, you can expect eight benefits when the heart’s release by love has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhaṃ supati, sukhaṃ paṭibujjhati, na pāpakaṃ supinaṃ passati, manussānaṃ piyo hoti, amanussānaṃ piyo hoti, devatā rakkhanti, nāssa aggi vā visaṃ vā satthaṃ vā kamati, uttariṃ appaṭivijjhanto brahmalokūpago hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You sleep well. You wake happily. You don’t see bad dreams. Humans love you. Non-humans love you. Deities protect you. You can’t be harmed by fire, poison, or blade. If you don’t reach any higher, you’ll be reborn in a Brahmā realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mettāya, bhikkhave, cetovimuttiyā āsevitāya bhāvitāya bahulīkatāya yānīkatāya vatthukatāya anuṭṭhitāya paricitāya susamāraddhāya ime aṭṭhānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">You can expect these eight benefits when the heart’s release by love has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ca mettaṃ bhāvayati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mindful one who develops </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appamāṇaṃ paṭissato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">limitless love </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tanū saṃyojanā honti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">weakens the fetters, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">passato upadhikkhayaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing the ending of attachments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekampi ce pāṇamaduṭṭhacitto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Loving just one creature with a hateless heart </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mettāyati kusalī tena hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">makes you a good person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe ca pāṇe manasānukampī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Compassionate for all creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahūtamariyo pakaroti puññaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a noble one creates abundant merit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye sattasaṇḍaṃ pathaviṃ vijetvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The royal potentates conquered this land </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājisayo yajamānā anupariyagā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and traveled around sponsoring sacrifices—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assamedhaṃ purisamedhaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">horse sacrifice, human sacrifice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammāpāsaṃ vājapeyyaṃ niraggaḷaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the sacrifices of the ‘stick-casting’, the ‘royal soma drinking’, and the ‘unbarred’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mettassa cittassa subhāvitassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are not worth a sixteenth part </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalampi te nānubhavanti soḷasiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of the mind developed with love, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Candappabhā tāragaṇāva sabbe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">as all the constellations of stars </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathā na agghanti kalampi soḷasiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">aren’t worth a sixteenth part of the moon’s light. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo na hanti na ghāteti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you don’t kill or encourage others to kill, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jināti na jāpaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">don’t conquer or encourage others to conquer, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mettaṃso sabbabhūtānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">with love for all sentient beings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">veraṃ tassa na kenacī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll have no enmity for anyone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
