<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.050-50. Dutiyaidhalokikasutta  - 50. Winning in This Life (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.050. 50. Dutiyaidhalokikasutta  - 50. Winning in This Life (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Uposathavagga  - 5. Sabbath </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo idhalokavijayāya paṭipanno hoti, ayaṃsa loko āraddho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a female who has four qualities is practicing to win in this life, and she succeeds at it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo susaṃvihitakammanto hoti, saṅgahitaparijano, bhattu manāpaṃ carati, sambhataṃ anurakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a female is well-organized at work, manages the domestic help, acts lovingly toward her husband, and preserves his earnings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo susaṃvihitakammanto hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a female well-organized at work? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo ye te bhattu abbhantarā kammantā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when she’s skilled and tireless in doing domestic duties for her husband … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo susaṃvihitakammanto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a female is well-organized at work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo saṅgahitaparijano hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a female manage the domestic help? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo yo so bhattu abbhantaro antojano … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when she knows what work her husband’s domestic bondservants, employees, and workers have completed, and what they’ve left incomplete. She knows who is sick, and who is fit or unwell. She distributes to each a fair portion of various foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo saṅgahitaparijano hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a female manages the domestic help. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo bhattu manāpaṃ carati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a female act lovingly toward her husband? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo yaṃ bhattu amanāpasaṅkhātaṃ taṃ jīvitahetupi na ajjhācarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a female would not transgress in any way that her husband would not consider loveable, even for the sake of her own life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo bhattu manāpaṃ carati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a female acts lovingly toward her husband. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo sambhataṃ anurakkhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how does a female preserve his earnings? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo yaṃ bhattā āharati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when she tries to guard and protect any income her husband earns … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo sambhataṃ anurakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a female preserves his earnings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo idhalokavijayāya paṭipanno hoti, ayaṃsa loko āraddho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A female who has these four qualities is practicing to win in this life, and she succeeds at it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo paralokavijayāya paṭipanno hoti, paraloko āraddho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A female who has four qualities is practicing to win in the next life, and she succeeds at it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi catūhi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What four? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo saddhāsampanno hoti, sīlasampanno hoti, cāgasampanno hoti, paññāsampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a female is accomplished in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo saddhāsampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a female accomplished in faith? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo saddho hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a female has faith in the Realized One’s awakening … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo saddhāsampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a female is accomplished in faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo sīlasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a female accomplished in ethics? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a female doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or consume alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo sīlasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a female is accomplished in ethics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo cāgasampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a female accomplished in generosity? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when she lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo cāgasampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a female is accomplished in generosity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo paññāsampanno hoti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how is a female accomplished in wisdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo paññavā hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a female is wise. She has the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo paññāsampanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how a female is accomplished in wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo paralokavijayāya paṭipanno hoti, paraloko āraddho hotīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A female who has these four qualities is practicing to win in the next life, and she succeeds at it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susaṃvihitakammantā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s organized at work, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgahitaparijjanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and manages the domestic help. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhattu manāpaṃ carati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s loveable to her husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambhataṃ anurakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and preserves his wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhā sīlena sampannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Faithful, accomplished in ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vadaññū vītamaccharā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">being kind and rid of stinginess. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niccaṃ maggaṃ visodheti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She always purifies the path </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sotthānaṃ samparāyikaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">to well-being in lives to come. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iccete aṭṭha dhammā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, a lady in whom </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā vijjanti nāriyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">these eight qualities are found </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tampi sīlavatiṃ āhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is known as virtuous, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammaṭṭhaṃ saccavādiniṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">firm in principle, and truthful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Soḷasākārasampannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Accomplished in sixteen respects, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhaṅgasusamāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">complete with the eight factors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tādisī sīlavatī upāsikā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">a virtuous laywoman such as she </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upapajjati devalokaṃ manāpan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reborn in the realm of the Loveable Gods.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uposathavaggo pañcamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkhitte vitthate visākhe, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāseṭṭho bojjhāya pañcamaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuruddhaṃ puna visākhe, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nakulā idhalokikā dveti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamo paṇṇāsako samatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
