<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.038-38. Sappurisasutta  - 38. A Good Person </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.038. 38. Sappurisasutta  - 38. A Good Person </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Dānavagga  - 4. Giving </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sappuriso, bhikkhave, kule jāyamāno bahuno janassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a good person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāpitūnaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, puttadārassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, dāsakammakaraporisassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, mittāmaccānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, pubbapetānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, rañño atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, devatānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the benefit, welfare, and happiness of mother and father; children and partners; bondservants, workers, and staff; friends and colleagues; departed ancestors; the king; the deities; and ascetics and brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahāmegho sabbasassāni sampādento bahuno janassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s like a great rain cloud, which nourishes all the crops for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, sappuriso kule jāyamāno bahuno janassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a good person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāpitūnaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, puttadārassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, dāsakammakaraporisassa atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, mittāmaccānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, pubbapetānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, rañño atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, devatānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti, samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hotīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahūnaṃ vata atthāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A wise person living at home </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappañño gharamāvasaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">benefits many people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātaraṃ pitaraṃ pubbe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Neither by day or at night do they neglect </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rattindivamatandito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">their mother, father, and ancestors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pūjeti sahadhammena, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They venerate them in accord with the teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbekatamanussaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">remembering what they have done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāgāre pabbajite, </span></p>
<p class="p3">One of settled faith and good nature </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apace brahmacārayo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">venerates the homeless renunciates, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Niviṭṭhasaddho pūjeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mendicant spiritual practitioners, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñatvā dhamme ca pesalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">knowing their good-hearted qualities. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rañño hito devahito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Good for the king, good for the gods, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātīnaṃ sakhinaṃ hito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and good for relatives and friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbesaṃ so hito hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In fact, they’re good for everyone, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhamme suppatiṭṭhito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">well grounded in the true teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vineyya maccheramalaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rid of the stain of stinginess, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sa lokaṃ bhajate sivan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll enjoy a world of grace.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
