<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.025-25. Mahānāmasutta  - 25. With Mahānāma </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.025. 25. Mahānāmasutta  - 25. With Mahānāma </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Gahapativagga  - 3. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṃ nigrodhārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho mahānāmo sakko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho mahānāmo sakko bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, upāsako hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, how is a lay follower defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, mahānāma, buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gato hoti, dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gato hoti, saṅghaṃ saraṇaṃ gato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mahānāma, when you’ve gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā kho, mahānāma, upāsako hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re considered to be a lay follower.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā pana, bhante, upāsako sīlavā hotī”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how is an ethical lay follower defined?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, mahānāma, upāsako pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti, adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti, musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭivirato hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“When a lay follower doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettāvatā kho, mahānāma, upāsako sīlavā hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re considered to be an ethical lay follower.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā pana, bhante, upāsako attahitāya paṭipanno hoti, no parahitāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how do we define a lay follower who is practicing to benefit themselves, not others?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, mahānāma, upāsako attanāva saddhāsampanno hoti, no paraṃ saddhāsampadāya samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A lay follower is accomplished in faith, but doesn’t encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāva sīlasampanno hoti, no paraṃ sīlasampadāya samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re accomplished in ethical conduct, but don’t encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāva cāgasampanno hoti, no paraṃ cāgasampadāya samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re accomplished in generosity, but don’t encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāva bhikkhūnaṃ dassanakāmo hoti, no paraṃ bhikkhūnaṃ dassane samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They like to see the mendicants, but don’t encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāva saddhammaṃ sotukāmo hoti, no paraṃ saddhammassavane samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They like to hear the true teaching, but don’t encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāva sutānaṃ dhammānaṃ dhāraṇajātiko hoti, no paraṃ dhammadhāraṇāya samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They readily memorize the teachings they’ve heard, but don’t encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāva sutānaṃ dhammānaṃ atthūpaparikkhitā hoti, no paraṃ atthūpaparikkhāya samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They examine the meaning of the teachings they’ve memorized, but don’t encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanāva atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya dhammānudhammappaṭipanno hoti, no paraṃ dhammānudhammappaṭipattiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Understanding the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly, but they don’t encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, mahānāma, upāsako attahitāya paṭipanno hoti, no parahitāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how we define a lay follower who is practicing to benefit themselves, not others.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kittāvatā pana, bhante, upāsako attahitāya ca paṭipanno hoti parahitāya cā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how do we define a lay follower who is practicing to benefit both themselves and others?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato kho, mahānāma, upāsako attanā ca saddhāsampanno hoti, parañca saddhāsampadāya samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“A lay follower is accomplished in faith and encourages others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca sīlasampanno hoti, parañca sīlasampadāya samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re accomplished in ethical conduct and encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca cāgasampanno hoti, parañca cāgasampadāya samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re accomplished in generosity and encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca bhikkhūnaṃ dassanakāmo hoti, parañca bhikkhūnaṃ dassane samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They like to see the mendicants and encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca saddhammaṃ sotukāmo hoti, parañca saddhammassavane samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They like to hear the true teaching and encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca sutānaṃ dhammānaṃ dhāraṇajātiko hoti, parañca dhammadhāraṇāya samādapeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They readily memorize the teachings they’ve heard and encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca sutānaṃ dhammānaṃ atthūpaparikkhitā hoti, parañca atthūpaparikkhāya samādapeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They examine the meaning of the teachings they’ve memorized and encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attanā ca atthamaññāya dhammamaññāya dhammānudhammappaṭipanno hoti, parañca dhammānudhammappaṭipattiyā samādapeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Understanding the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly and they encourage others to do the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ettāvatā kho, mahānāma, upāsako attahitāya ca paṭipanno hoti parahitāya cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how we define a lay follower who is practicing to benefit both themselves and others.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
