<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.029-29. Akkhaṇasutta  - 29. Lost Opportunities </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.029. 29. Akkhaṇasutta  - 29. Lost Opportunities </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">3. Gahapativagga  - 3. Householders </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“‘Khaṇakicco loko, khaṇakicco loko’ti, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano bhāsati, no ca kho so jānāti khaṇaṃ vā akkhaṇaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘Now is the time! Now is the time!’ So says an uneducated ordinary person. But they don’t know whether it’s time or not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhime, bhikkhave, akkhaṇā asamayā brahmacariyavāsāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, there are eight lost opportunities for spiritual practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, tathāgato ca loke uppanno hoti arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā, dhammo ca desiyati opasamiko parinibbāniko sambodhagāmī sugatappavedito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Firstly, a Realized One has arisen in the world—perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. He teaches the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as proclaimed by the Holy One. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca puggalo nirayaṃ upapanno hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a person has been reborn in hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo akkhaṇo asamayo brahmacariyavāsāya. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first lost opportunity for spiritual practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tathāgato ca loke uppanno hoti … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā, dhammo ca desiyati opasamiko parinibbāniko sambodhagāmī sugatappavedito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca puggalo tiracchānayoniṃ upapanno hoti … pe …. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a person has been reborn in the animal realm. This is the second lost opportunity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca puggalo pettivisayaṃ upapanno hoti … pe …. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a person has been reborn in the ghost realm. This is the third lost opportunity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca puggalo aññataraṃ dīghāyukaṃ devanikāyaṃ upapanno hoti … pe …. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a person has been reborn in one of the long-lived orders of gods. This is the fourth lost opportunity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca puggalo paccantimesu janapadesu paccājāto hoti, so ca hoti aviññātāresu milakkhesu, yattha natthi gati bhikkhūnaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ upāsakānaṃ upāsikānaṃ … pe …. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But a person has been reborn in the borderlands, among strange barbarian tribes, where monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen do not go. This is the fifth lost opportunity … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave … pe … ayañca puggalo majjhimesu janapadesu paccājāto hoti, so ca hoti micchādiṭṭhiko viparītadassano: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is reborn in a central country. But they have wrong view and distorted perspective: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘natthi dinnaṃ, natthi yiṭṭhaṃ, natthi hutaṃ, natthi sukatadukkaṭānaṃ kammānaṃ phalaṃ vipāko, natthi ayaṃ loko, natthi paro loko, natthi mātā, natthi pitā, natthi sattā opapātikā, natthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammaggatā sammā paṭipannā ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti … pe …. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no obligation to mother and father. No beings are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is well attained and practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ This is the sixth lost opportunity … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayañca puggalo majjhimesu janapadesu paccājāto hoti, so ca hoti duppañño jaḷo eḷamūgo appaṭibalo subhāsitadubbhāsitassa atthamaññātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a person is reborn in a central country. But they’re witless, dull, stupid, and unable to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, sattamo akkhaṇo asamayo brahmacariyavāsāya. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh lost opportunity … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tathāgato ca loke anuppanno hoti arahaṃ sammāsambuddho … pe … satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, a Realized One has not arisen in the world … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammo ca na desiyati opasamiko parinibbāniko sambodhagāmī sugatappavedito. Ayañca puggalo majjhimesu janapadesu paccājāto hoti, so ca hoti paññavā ajaḷo aneḷamūgo paṭibalo subhāsitadubbhāsitassa atthamaññātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So he doesn’t teach the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as proclaimed by the Holy One. And a person is reborn in a central country. And they’re wise, bright, clever, and able to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, aṭṭhamo akkhaṇo asamayo brahmacariyavāsāya. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the eighth lost opportunity … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭha akkhaṇā asamayā brahmacariyavāsāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There are these eight lost opportunities for spiritual practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekova kho, bhikkhave, khaṇo ca samayo ca brahmacariyavāsāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mendicants, there is just one opportunity for spiritual practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamo eko? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What is that one? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, tathāgato ca loke uppanno hoti arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a Realized One has arisen in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammo ca desiyati opasamiko parinibbāniko sambodhagāmī sugatappavedito. Ayañca puggalo majjhimesu janapadesu paccājāto hoti, so ca hoti paññavā ajaḷo aneḷamūgo paṭibalo subhāsitadubbhāsitassa atthamaññātuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He teaches the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as proclaimed by the Holy One. And a person is reborn in a central country. And they’re wise, bright, clever, and able to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, ekova khaṇo ca samayo ca brahmacariyavāsāyāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the one opportunity for spiritual practice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussalābhaṃ laddhāna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When you’ve gained the human state, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhamme suppavedite; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the true teaching has been so well proclaimed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye khaṇaṃ nādhigacchanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">if you don’t seize the moment </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atināmenti te khaṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">it’ll pass you by. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahū hi akkhaṇā vuttā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For many wrong times are spoken of, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maggassa antarāyikā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">which obstruct the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kadāci karahaci loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Only on rare occasions </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppajjanti tathāgatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">do Realized Ones arise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayidaṃ sammukhībhūtaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you find yourself in their presence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṃ lokasmiṃ sudullabhaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">so hard to find in the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussapaṭilābho ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and if you’ve gained a human birth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammassa ca desanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the teaching of the Dhamma; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alaṃ vāyamituṃ tattha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s enough to make an effort, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attakāmena jantunā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for a person who loves themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ vijaññā saddhammaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">How is the true teaching to be understood </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khaṇo ve mā upaccagā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">so that the moment doesn’t pass you by? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khaṇātītā hi socanti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For if you miss your moment </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nirayamhi samappitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll grieve when you’re sent to hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha ce naṃ virādheti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If you fail to achieve </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammassa niyāmataṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">certainty regarding the true teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāṇijova atītattho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’ll regret it for a long time, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cirattaṃ anutapissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a trader who loses a profit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avijjānivuto poso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A man hindered by ignorance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhammaṃ aparādhiko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a failure in the true teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātimaraṇasaṃsāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">will long undergo </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ciraṃ paccanubhossati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">transmigration through birth and death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye ca laddhā manussattaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who’ve gained the human state </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhamme suppavedite; </span></p>
<p class="p3">when the true teaching has been so well proclaimed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akaṃsu satthu vacanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and have completed what the Teacher taught—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karissanti karonti vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or will do so, or are doing so now—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khaṇaṃ paccaviduṃ loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">have realized the right time in the world </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmacariyaṃ anuttaraṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the supreme spiritual life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye maggaṃ paṭipajjiṃsu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should live guarded, ever mindful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathāgatappaveditaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not soaked with defilements, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye saṃvarā cakkhumatā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">among those restrained ones </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">desitādiccabandhunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who have practiced the path </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesu gutto sadā sato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">proclaimed by the Realized One, the one with vision, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vihare anavassuto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and taught by the Kinsman of the Sun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbe anusaye chetvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having cut off all underlying tendencies </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māradheyyaparānuge; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that follow those drifting in Māra’s dominion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ve pāraṅgatā loke, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re the ones in this world who’ve truly crossed over, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye pattā āsavakkhayan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">having reached the ending of defilements.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
