<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.087-87. Pattanikujjanasutta  - 87. Turning the Bowl Upside Down </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.087. 87. Pattanikujjanasutta  - 87. Turning the Bowl Upside Down </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">9. Sativagga  - 9. Mindfulness </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgatassa upāsakassa ākaṅkhamāno saṃgho pattaṃ nikkujjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the Saṅgha may, if it wishes, turn the bowl upside down for a lay follower on eight grounds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūnaṃ alābhāya parisakkati, bhikkhūnaṃ anatthāya parisakkati, bhikkhūnaṃ avāsāya parisakkati, bhikkhū akkosati paribhāsati, bhikkhū bhikkhūhi bhedeti, buddhassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, dhammassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, saṃghassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They try to prevent the mendicants from getting material possessions. They try to harm mendicants. They try to drive mendicants from a monastery. They insult and abuse mendicants. They divide mendicants against each other. They criticize the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahaṅgehi samannāgatassa upāsakassa ākaṅkhamāno saṃgho pattaṃ nikkujjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Saṅgha may, if it wishes, turn the bowl upside down for a lay follower on these eight grounds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgatassa upāsakassa ākaṅkhamāno saṅgho pattaṃ ukkujjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Saṅgha may, if it wishes, turn the bowl upright for a lay follower on eight grounds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na bhikkhūnaṃ alābhāya parisakkati, na bhikkhūnaṃ anatthāya parisakkati, na bhikkhūnaṃ avāsāya parisakkati, na bhikkhū akkosati paribhāsati, na bhikkhū bhikkhūhi bhedeti, buddhassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, dhammassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, saṅghassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t try to prevent the mendicants from getting material possessions. They don’t try to harm mendicants. They don’t try to drive mendicants from a monastery. They don’t insult and abuse mendicants. They don’t divide mendicants against each other. They don’t criticize the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahaṅgehi samannāgatassa upāsakassa ākaṅkhamāno saṅgho pattaṃ ukkujjeyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Saṅgha may, if it wishes, turn the bowl upright for a lay follower on these eight grounds.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
