<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.033-33. Dānavatthusutta  - 33. Reasons to Give </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.033. 33. Dānavatthusutta  - 33. Reasons to Give </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Dānavagga  - 4. Giving </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhimāni, bhikkhave, dānavatthūni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these eight grounds for giving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chandā dānaṃ deti, dosā dānaṃ deti, mohā dānaṃ deti, bhayā dānaṃ deti, ‘dinnapubbaṃ katapubbaṃ pitupitāmahehi, nārahāmi porāṇaṃ kulavaṃsaṃ hāpetun’ti dānaṃ deti, ‘imāhaṃ dānaṃ datvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissāmī’ti dānaṃ deti, ‘imaṃ me dānaṃ dadato cittaṃ pasīdati, attamanatā somanassaṃ upajāyatī’ti dānaṃ deti, cittālaṅkāracittaparikkhāratthaṃ dānaṃ deti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A person might give a gift out of favoritism or hostility or stupidity or cowardice. Or they give thinking, ‘Giving was practiced by my father and my father’s father. It would not be right for me to abandon this family tradition.’ Or they give thinking, ‘After I’ve given this gift, when my body breaks up, after death, I’ll be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ Or they give thinking, ‘When giving this gift my mind becomes clear, and I become happy and joyful.’ Or they give a gift thinking, ‘This is an adornment and requisite for the mind.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭha dānavatthūnī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the eight grounds for giving.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
