<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.011-11. Verañjasutta  - 11. At Verañja </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.011. 11. Verañjasutta  - 11. At Verañja </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Mahāvagga  - 2. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā verañjāyaṃ viharati naḷerupucimandamūle. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in Verañja at the root of a neem tree dedicated to Naḷeru. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho verañjo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the brahmin Verañja went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho verañjo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sutaṃ metaṃ, bho gotama: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama, I have heard that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na samaṇo gotamo brāhmaṇe jiṇṇe vuḍḍhe mahallake addhagate vayoanuppatte abhivādeti vā paccuṭṭheti vā āsanena vā nimantetī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the ascetic Gotama doesn’t bow to old brahmins, the elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayidaṃ, bho gotama, tatheva. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is indeed the case, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na hi bhavaṃ gotamo brāhmaṇe jiṇṇe vuḍḍhe mahallake addhagate vayoanuppatte abhivādeti vā paccuṭṭheti vā āsanena vā nimanteti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for Master Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayidaṃ, bho gotama, na sampannamevā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is not appropriate, Master Gotama.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṃ taṃ, brāhmaṇa, passāmi sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya yamahaṃ abhivādeyyaṃ vā paccuṭṭheyyaṃ vā āsanena vā nimanteyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Brahmin, I don’t see anyone in this world—with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—for whom I should bow down or rise up or offer a seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yañhi, brāhmaṇa, tathāgato abhivādeyya vā paccuṭṭheyya vā āsanena vā nimanteyya, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If the Realized One bowed down or rose up or offered a seat to anyone, their head would explode!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Arasarūpo bhavaṃ gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama lacks taste.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi khvesa, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘arasarūpo samaṇo gotamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I lack taste. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te, brāhmaṇa, rūparasā saddarasā gandharasā rasarasā phoṭṭhabbarasā, te tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṃkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the Realized One has given up taste for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this sense you could rightly say that I lack taste. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘arasarūpo samaṇo gotamo’ti, no ca kho yaṃ tvaṃ sandhāya vadesī”ti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not what you’re talking about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nibbhogo bhavaṃ gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama is indelicate.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi khvesa, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nibbhogo samaṇo gotamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that I’m indelicate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te, brāhmaṇa, rūpabhogā saddabhogā gandhabhogā rasabhogā phoṭṭhabbabhogā, te tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For the Realized One has given up delight in sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this sense you could rightly say that I’m indelicate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘nibbhogo samaṇo gotamo’ti, no ca kho yaṃ tvaṃ sandhāya vadesī”ti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not what you’re talking about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Akiriyavādo bhavaṃ gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama is a teacher of inaction.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi khvesa, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘akiriyavādo samaṇo gotamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m a teacher of inaction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, akiriyaṃ vadāmi kāyaduccaritassa vacīduccaritassa manoduccaritassa; anekavihitānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ akiriyaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I teach inaction regarding bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the many kinds of unskillful things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this sense you could rightly say that I’m a teacher of inaction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘akiriyavādo samaṇo gotamo’ti, no ca kho yaṃ tvaṃ sandhāya vadesī”ti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not what you’re talking about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ucchedavādo bhavaṃ gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama is a teacher of annihilationism.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi khvesa, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ucchedavādo samaṇo gotamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m a teacher of annihilationism. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, ucchedaṃ vadāmi rāgassa dosassa mohassa; anekavihitānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ucchedaṃ vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I teach the annihilation of greed, hate, and delusion, and the many kinds of unskillful things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this sense you could rightly say that I’m a teacher of annihilationism. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ucchedavādo samaṇo gotamo’ti, no ca kho yaṃ tvaṃ sandhāya vadesī”ti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not what you’re talking about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jegucchī bhavaṃ gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama is disgusted.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi khvesa, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘jegucchī samaṇo gotamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m disgusted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, jigucchāmi kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena; jigucchāmi anekavihitānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I’m disgusted by bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and by attainment of the many kinds of unskillful things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this sense you could rightly say that I’m digusted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘jegucchī samaṇo gotamo’ti, no ca kho yaṃ tvaṃ sandhāya vadesī”ti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not what you’re talking about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Venayiko bhavaṃ gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama is an exterminator.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi khvesa, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘venayiko samaṇo gotamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m an exterminator. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, vinayāya dhammaṃ desemi rāgassa dosassa mohassa; anekavihitānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ vinayāya dhammaṃ desemi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I teach the extermination of greed, hate, and delusion, and the many kinds of unskillful things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this sense you could rightly say that I’m an exterminator. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘venayiko samaṇo gotamo’ti, no ca kho yaṃ tvaṃ sandhāya vadesī”ti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not what you’re talking about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tapassī bhavaṃ gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama is a mortifier.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi khvesa, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tapassī samaṇo gotamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m a mortifier. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tapanīyāhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, pāpake akusale dhamme vadāmi kāyaduccaritaṃ vacīduccaritaṃ manoduccaritaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For I say that bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind should be mortified. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kho, brāhmaṇa, tapanīyā pāpakā akusalā dhammā pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā, tamahaṃ ‘tapassī’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that a mortifier is someone who has given up unskillful qualities that should be mortified. They’ve cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa kho, brāhmaṇa, tapanīyā pāpakā akusalā dhammā pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One is someone who has given up unskillful qualities that should be mortified. He has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this sense you could rightly say that I’m a mortifier. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tapassī samaṇo gotamo’ti, no ca kho yaṃ tvaṃ sandhāya vadesī”ti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not what you’re talking about.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Apagabbho bhavaṃ gotamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama is an abortionist.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthi khvesa, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘apagabbho samaṇo gotamo’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m an abortionist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kho, brāhmaṇa, āyatiṃ gabbhaseyyā punabbhavābhinibbatti pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā, tamahaṃ ‘apagabbho’ti vadāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I say that an abortionist is someone who has given up future wombs and rebirth into a new state of existence. They’ve cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa kho, brāhmaṇa, āyatiṃ gabbhaseyyā punabbhavābhinibbatti pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has given up future wombs and rebirth into a new state of existence. He has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, pariyāyo, yena maṃ pariyāyena sammā vadamāno vadeyya: </span></p>
<p class="p3">In this sense you could rightly say that I’m an abortionist. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘apagabbho samaṇo gotamo’ti, no ca kho yaṃ tvaṃ sandhāya vadesi. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">But that’s not what you’re talking about. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, brāhmaṇa, kukkuṭiyā aṇḍāni aṭṭha vā dasa vā dvādasa vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose, brahmin, there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tānāssu kukkuṭiyā sammā adhisayitāni sammā pariseditāni sammā paribhāvitāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And she properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo nu kho tesaṃ kukkuṭacchāpakānaṃ paṭhamataraṃ pādanakhasikhāya vā mukhatuṇḍakena vā aṇḍakosaṃ padāletvā sotthinā abhinibbhijjeyya, kinti svāssa vacanīyo: ‘jeṭṭho vā kaniṭṭho vā’”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now, the chick that is first to break out of the eggshell with its claws and beak and hatch safely: should that be called the eldest or the youngest?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jeṭṭho tissa, bho gotama, vacanīyo. So hi nesaṃ, bho gotama, jeṭṭho hotī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master, Gotama, that should be called the eldest. For it is the eldest among them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamevaṃ kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, avijjāgatāya pajāya aṇḍabhūtāya pariyonaddhāya avijjaṇḍakosaṃ padāletvā ekova loke anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In the same way, in this population lost in ignorance, trapped in their shells, I alone have broken open the egg of ignorance and realized the supreme perfect awakening. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, jeṭṭho seṭṭho lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So, brahmin, I am the eldest and the best in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraddhaṃ kho pana me, brāhmaṇa, vīriyaṃ ahosi asallīnaṃ, upaṭṭhitā sati asammuṭṭhā, passaddho kāyo asāraddho, samāhitaṃ cittaṃ ekaggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">My energy was roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness was established and lucid, my body was tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind was immersed in samādhi. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kho ahaṃ, brāhmaṇa, vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca viharāmi sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṃvedemi yaṃ taṃ ariyā ācikkhanti: ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">And with the fading away of rapture, I entered and remained in the third absorption, where I meditated with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, I entered and remained in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte pubbenivāsānussatiñāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmesiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward recollection of past lives. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarāmi, seyyathidaṃ—ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo tissopi jātiyo catassopi jātiyo pañcapi jātiyo dasapi jātiyo vīsampi jātiyo tiṃsampi jātiyo cattālīsampi jātiyo paññāsampi jātiyo jātisatampi jātisahassampi jātisatasahassampi anekepi saṃvaṭṭakappe anekepi vivaṭṭakappe anekepi saṃvaṭṭavivaṭṭakappe: ‘amutrāsiṃ evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto evaṃvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṃsukhadukkhappaṭisaṃvedī evamāyupariyanto. So tato cuto amutra udapādiṃ; tatrāpāsiṃ evaṃnāmo evaṅgotto evaṃvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṃsukhadukkhappaṭisaṃvedī evamāyupariyanto. So tato cuto idhūpapanno’ti. Iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I recollected many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. I remembered: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so I recollected my many kinds of past lives, with features and details. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho me, brāhmaṇa, rattiyā paṭhame yāme paṭhamā vijjā adhigatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was the first knowledge, which I achieved in the first watch of the night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjā vihatā vijjā uppannā; tamo vihato āloko uppanno, yathā taṃ appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho me, brāhmaṇa, paṭhamā abhinibbhidā ahosi kukkuṭacchāpakasseva aṇḍakosamhā. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was my first breaking out, like a chick breaking out of the eggshell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte sattānaṃ cutūpapātañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmesiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passāmi cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe, sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajānāmi: ‘ime vata bhonto sattā kāyaduccaritena samannāgatā, vacīduccaritena samannāgatā, manoduccaritena samannāgatā, ariyānaṃ upavādakā, micchādiṭṭhikā, micchādiṭṭhikammasamādānā. Te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannāti. Ime vā pana bhonto sattā kāyasucaritena samannāgatā, vacīsucaritena samannāgatā, manosucaritena samannāgatā, ariyānaṃ anupavādakā, sammādiṭṭhikā, sammādiṭṭhikammasamādānā. Te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapannā’ti. Iti dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passāmi cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe, sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajānāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I understood how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they acted out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I understood how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho me, brāhmaṇa, rattiyā majjhime yāme dutiyā vijjā adhigatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was the second knowledge, which I achieved in the middle watch of the night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjā vihatā vijjā uppannā; tamo vihato āloko uppanno, yathā taṃ appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho me, brāhmaṇa, dutiyā abhinibbhidā ahosi kukkuṭacchāpakasseva aṇḍakosamhā. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was my second breaking out, like a chick breaking out of the eggshell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte āsavānaṃ khayañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmesiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">I truly understood: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ime āsavā’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, ‘ayaṃ āsavasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, ‘ayaṃ āsavanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ, ‘ayaṃ āsavanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ abbhaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I truly understood: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa me evaṃ jānato evaṃ passato kāmāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccittha, bhavāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccittha, avijjāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccittha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing and seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When it was freed, I knew it was freed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti abbhaññāsiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I understood: ‘Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is no return to any state of existence.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho me, brāhmaṇa, rattiyā pacchime yāme tatiyā vijjā adhigatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was the third knowledge, which I achieved in the last watch of the night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avijjā vihatā vijjā uppannā; tamo vihato āloko uppanno, yathā taṃ appamattassa ātāpino pahitattassa viharato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ kho me, brāhmaṇa, tatiyā abhinibbhidā ahosi kukkuṭacchāpakasseva aṇḍakosamhā”ti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This was my third breaking out, like a chick breaking out of the eggshell.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ vutte, verañjo brāhmaṇo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he said this, the brahmin Verañja said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“jeṭṭho bhavaṃ gotamo, seṭṭho bhavaṃ gotamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Master Gotama is the eldest! Master Gotama is the best! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama, abhikkantaṃ, bho gotama. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, bho gotama, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya: ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā gotamena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with good eyes can see what’s there, Master Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esāhaṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañca bhikkhusaṃghañca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakaṃ maṃ bhavaṃ gotamo dhāretu ajjatagge pāṇupetaṃ saraṇaṃ gatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">From this day forth, may Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
