<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.048-48. Nakulamātāsutta  - 48. With Nakula’s Mother on the Loveable Gods </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.048. 48. Nakulamātāsutta  - 48. With Nakula’s Mother on the Loveable Gods </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Uposathavagga  - 5. Sabbath </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bhaggesu viharati susumāragire bhesakaḷāvane migadāye. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Bhaggas on Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā’s Wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho nakulamātā gahapatānī yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā … pe …. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho nakulamātaraṃ gahapatāniṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the housewife Nakula’s mother went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi kho, nakulamāte, dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manāpakāyikānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Nakula’s mother, when they have eight qualities females—when their body breaks up, after death—are reborn in company with the Gods of the Lovable Host. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, nakulamāte, mātugāmo yassa mātāpitaro bhattuno denti atthakāmā hitesino anukampakā anukampaṃ upādāya tassa hoti pubbuṭṭhāyinī pacchānipātinī kiṅkārapaṭissāvinī manāpacārinī piyavādinī. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">Take the case of a female whose mother and father give her to a husband wanting what’s best for her, out of kindness and compassion. She would get up before him and go to bed after him, and be obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhattu garuno honti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She honors, respects, esteems, and venerates those her husband respects, such as </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāti vā pitāti vā samaṇabrāhmaṇāti vā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">mother and father, and ascetics and brahmins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">te sakkaroti garuṃ karoti māneti pūjeti, abbhāgate ca āsanodakena paṭipūjeti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">And when they arrive she serves them with a seat and water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhattu abbhantarā kammantā—uṇṇāti vā kappāsāti vā—tattha dakkhā hoti analasā tatrupāyāya vīmaṃsāya samannāgatā alaṃ kātuṃ alaṃ saṃvidhātuṃ. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s skilled and tireless in her husband’s household duties, such as knitting and sewing. She understands how to go about things in order to complete and organize the work. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo so bhattu abbhantaro antojano—dāsāti vā pessāti vā kammakarāti vā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She knows what work her husband’s domestic bondservants, employees, and workers have completed, and what they’ve left incomplete. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṃ katañca katato jānāti akatañca akatato jānāti, gilānakānañca balābalaṃ jānāti khādanīyaṃ bhojanīyañcassa paccaṃsena saṃvibhajati. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">She knows who is sick, and who is fit or unwell. She distributes to each a fair portion of various foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ bhattā āharati dhanaṃ vā dhaññaṃ vā rajataṃ vā jātarūpaṃ vā taṃ ārakkhena guttiyā sampādeti, tattha ca hoti adhuttī athenī asoṇḍī avināsikā. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">She ensures that any income her husband earns is guarded and protected, whether money, grain, silver, or gold. She doesn’t overspend, steal, waste, or lose it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsikā kho pana hoti buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā saṅghaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s a lay follower who has gone for refuge to the Buddha, his teaching, and the Saṅgha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavatī kho pana hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s ethical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṇātipātā paṭiviratā … pe … surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhānā paṭiviratā … pe …. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">She doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cāgavatī kho pana hoti vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati muttacāgā payatapāṇinī vossaggaratā yācayogā dānasaṃvibhāgaratā. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s generous. She lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, nakulamāte, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manāpakāyikānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When they have these eight qualities females—when their body breaks up, after death—are reborn in company with the Gods of the Lovable Host. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo naṃ bharati sabbadā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’d never look down on her husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">niccaṃ ātāpi ussuko; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who’s always keen to work hard, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ sabbakāmadaṃ posaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">always looking after her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhattāraṃ nātimaññati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and bringing whatever she wants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na cāpi sotthi bhattāraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And a good woman never scolds her husband </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">issāvādena rosaye; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with jealous words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhattu ca garuno sabbe, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Being astute, she reveres </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭipūjeti paṇḍitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">those respected by her husband. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṭṭhāhikā analasā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She gets up early, works tirelessly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgahitaparijjanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and manages the domestic help. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhattu manāpaṃ carati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">She’s loveable to her husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambhataṃ anurakkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and preserves his wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā evaṃ vattati nārī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A lady who fulfills these duties </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhattu chandavasānugā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">according to her husband’s desire, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manāpā nāma te devā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">is reborn among the gods </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha sā upapajjatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">called ‘Loveable’.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
