<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.119-119  - 119 </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.119. 119  - 119 </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">11. Rāgapeyyāla  - 11. Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Rāgassa, bhikkhave, abhiññāya aṭṭha dhammā bhāvetabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“For insight into greed, eight things should be developed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattaṃ rūpasaññī bahiddhā rūpāni passati parittāni suvaṇṇadubbaṇṇāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perceiving form internally, they see visions externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāni abhibhuyya ‘jānāmi passāmī’ti evaṃsaññī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattaṃ rūpasaññī bahiddhā rūpāni passati appamāṇāni suvaṇṇadubbaṇṇāni, tāni abhibhuyya ‘jānāmi passāmī’ti evaṃsaññī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Perceiving form internally, they see visions externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattaṃ arūpasaññī bahiddhā rūpāni passati parittāni suvaṇṇadubbaṇṇāni, tāni abhibhuyya ‘jānāmi passāmī’ti evaṃsaññī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not perceiving form internally, they see visions externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattaṃ arūpasaññī bahiddhā rūpāni passati appamāṇāni suvaṇṇadubbaṇṇāni, tāni abhibhuyya ‘jānāmi passāmī’ti evaṃsaññī hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not perceiving form internally, they see visions externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattaṃ arūpasaññī bahiddhā rūpāni passati nīlāni nīlavaṇṇāni nīlanidassanāni nīlanibhāsāni </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not perceiving form internally, they see visions externally, blue, with blue color, blue hue, and blue tint. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pītāni pītavaṇṇāni … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">yellow … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lohitakāni lohitakavaṇṇāni … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">red … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">odātāni odātavaṇṇāni … pe … odātanibhāsāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not perceiving form internally, they see visions externally, white, with white color, white hue, and white tint. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāni abhibhuyya ‘jānāmi passāmī’ti evaṃsaññī hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rāgassa, bhikkhave, abhiññāya ime aṭṭha dhammā bhāvetabbā”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">For insight into greed, these eight things should be developed.”</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
