<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.013-13. Assājānīyasutta  - 13. A Thoroughbred </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.013. 13. Assājānīyasutta  - 13. A Thoroughbred </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Mahāvagga  - 2. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato rañño bhaddo assājānīyo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅganteva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with eight factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, rañño bhaddo assājānīyo ubhato sujāto hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a fine royal thoroughbred is well born on both </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātito ca pitito ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the mother’s and the father’s sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassaṃ disāyaṃ aññepi bhaddā assājānīyā jāyanti, tassaṃ disāyaṃ jāto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s bred in the region fine thoroughbreds come from. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho panassa bhojanaṃ denti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever food he’s given, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">allaṃ vā sukkhaṃ vā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">fresh or dry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ sakkaccaṃyeva paribhuñjati avikiranto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he eats carefully, without making a mess. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jegucchī hoti uccāraṃ vā passāvaṃ vā abhinisīdituṃ vā abhinipajjituṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s disgusted by sitting or lying down in excrement or urine. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sorato hoti sukhasaṃvāso, na ca aññe asse ubbejetā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s sweet-natured and pleasant to live with, and he doesn’t upset the other horses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kho panassa honti sāṭheyyāni kūṭeyyāni jimheyyāni vaṅkeyyāni, tāni yathābhūtaṃ sārathissa āvikattā hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He openly shows his tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints to his trainer, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesamassa sārathi abhinimmadanāya vāyamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so the trainer can try to subdue them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāhī kho pana hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He carries his load, determining: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kāmaññe assā vahantu vā mā vā, ahamettha vahissāmī’ti cittaṃ uppādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Whether or not the other horses carry their loads, I’ll carry mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gacchanto kho pana ujumaggeneva gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He always walks in a straight path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thāmavā hoti yāva jīvitamaraṇapariyādānā thāmaṃ upadaṃsetā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s strong, and stays strong even until death. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi aṅgehi samannāgato rañño bhaddo assājānīyo rājāraho hoti rājabhoggo, rañño aṅganteva saṅkhaṃ gacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A fine royal thoroughbred with these eight factors is worthy of a king. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, a mendicant with eight factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ kho panassa bhojanaṃ denti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whatever food they’re given, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lūkhaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">coarse or fine, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṃ sakkaccaṃyeva paribhuñjati avihaññamāno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they eat carefully, without annoyance. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jegucchī hoti kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They're disgusted with bad conduct by way of body, speech, or mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jegucchī hoti anekavihitānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and by attainment of the many kinds of unskillful things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sorato hoti sukhasaṃvāso, na aññe bhikkhū ubbejetā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They're sweet-natured and pleasant to live with, and they doesn’t upset the other mendicants. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kho panassa honti sāṭheyyāni kūṭeyyāni jimheyyāni vaṅkeyyāni, tāni yathābhūtaṃ āvikattā hoti satthari vā viññūsu vā sabrahmacārīsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They openly show their tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints to their sensible spiritual companions, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesamassa satthā vā viññū vā sabrahmacārī abhinimmadanāya vāyamati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so they can try to subdue them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhitā kho pana hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They do their training, determining: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Kāmaññe bhikkhū sikkhantu vā mā vā, ahamettha sikkhissāmī’ti cittaṃ uppādeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Whether or not the other mendicants do their training, I’ll do mine.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gacchanto kho pana ujumaggeneva gacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">They always walk in a straight path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatrāyaṃ ujumaggo, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And here the straight path is </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āraddhavīriyo viharati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re energetic: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kāmaṃ taco ca nhāru ca aṭṭhi ca avasissatu, sarīre upassussatu maṃsalohitaṃ; yaṃ taṃ purisathāmena purisavīriyena purisaparakkamena pattabbaṃ, na taṃ apāpuṇitvā vīriyassa saṇṭhānaṃ bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Gladly, let my skin, sinews, and bones remain! Let the blood and flesh waste away in my body! I will not stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by manly strength, energy, and vigor.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these eight factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
