<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.043-43. Visākhāsutta  - 43. With Visākhā on the Sabbath </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.043. 43. Visākhāsutta  - 43. With Visākhā on the Sabbath </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">5. Uposathavagga  - 5. Sabbath </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho visākhā migāramātā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho visākhaṃ migāramātaraṃ bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Visākhā, Migāra’s mother, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato kho, visākhe, uposatho upavuttho mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso mahājutiko mahāvipphāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Visākhā, the observance of the sabbath with its eight factors is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ upavuttho ca, visākhe, aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato uposatho mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso mahājutiko mahāvipphāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And how should it be observed? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, visākhe, ariyasāvako iti paṭisañcikkhati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a noble disciple reflects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yāvajīvaṃ arahanto pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭiviratā nihitadaṇḍā nihitasatthā lajjī dayāpannā, sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampino viharanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭivirato nihitadaṇḍo nihitasattho lajjī dayāpanno, sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī viharāmi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I’ll be scrupulous and kind, and live full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā paṭhamena aṅgena samannāgato hoti … pe …. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its first factor. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Yāvajīvaṃ arahanto uccāsayanamahāsayanaṃ pahāya uccāsayanamahāsayanā paṭiviratā nīcaseyyaṃ kappenti—mañcake vā tiṇasanthārake vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious beds. They sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahampajja imañca rattiṃ imañca divasaṃ uccāsayanamahāsayanaṃ pahāya uccāsayanamahāsayanā paṭivirato nīcaseyyaṃ kappemi—mañcake vā tiṇasanthārake vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I, too, for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I’ll sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imināpaṅgena arahataṃ anukaromi, uposatho ca me upavuttho bhavissatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iminā aṭṭhamena aṅgena samannāgato hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is its eighth factor. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ upavuttho kho, visākhe, aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato uposatho mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṃso mahājutiko mahāvipphāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The observance of the sabbath with its eight factors in this way is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kīvamahapphalo hoti, kīvamahānisaṃso, kīvamahājutiko, kīvamahāvipphāro? </span></p>
<p class="p3">How much so? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathāpi, visākhe, yo imesaṃ soḷasannaṃ mahājanapadānaṃ pahūtarattaratanānaṃ issariyādhipaccaṃ rajjaṃ kāreyya, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suppose you were to rule as sovereign lord over these sixteen great countries—Aṅga, Magadha, Kāsī, Kosala, Vajjī, Malla, Ceti, Vaṅga, Kuru, Pañcāla, Maccha, Sūrusena, Assaka, Avanti, Gandhāra, and Kamboja—full of the seven kinds of precious things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṅgānaṃ magadhānaṃ kāsīnaṃ kosalānaṃ vajjīnaṃ mallānaṃ cetīnaṃ vaṅgānaṃ kurūnaṃ pañcālānaṃ macchānaṃ sūrasenānaṃ assakānaṃ avantīnaṃ gandhārānaṃ kambojānaṃ, aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgatassa uposathassa etaṃ kalaṃ nāgghati soḷasiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This wouldn’t be worth a sixteenth part of the sabbath with its eight factors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kissa hetu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">Why is that? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kapaṇaṃ, visākhe, mānusakaṃ rajjaṃ dibbaṃ sukhaṃ upanidhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni, visākhe, mānusakāni paññāsa vassāni, cātumahārājikānaṃ devānaṃ eso eko rattindivo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fifty years in the human realm is one day and night for the Gods of the Four Great Kings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya rattiyā tiṃsarattiyo māso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thirty such days make up a month. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena māsena dvādasamāsiyo saṃvaccharo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twelve such months make up a year. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena saṃvaccharena dibbāni pañca vassasatāni cātumahārājikānaṃ devānaṃ āyuppamāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The life span of the Gods of the Four Great Kings is five hundred of these divine years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, visākhe, vijjati yaṃ idhekacco itthī vā puriso vā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavasitvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā cātumahārājikānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s possible that a woman or man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will—when their body breaks up, after death—be reborn in the company of the Gods of the Four Great Kings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho panetaṃ, visākhe, sandhāya bhāsitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is what I was referring to when I said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kapaṇaṃ mānusakaṃ rajjaṃ dibbaṃ sukhaṃ upanidhāya’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ, visākhe, mānusakaṃ vassasataṃ, tāvatiṃsānaṃ devānaṃ eso eko rattindivo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the Gods of the Thirty-Three. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya rattiyā tiṃsarattiyo māso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thirty such days make up a month. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena māsena dvādasamāsiyo saṃvaccharo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twelve such months make up a year. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena saṃvaccharena vassasahassaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ devānaṃ āyuppamāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The life span of the Gods of the Thirty-Three is a thousand of these divine years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, visākhe, vijjati yaṃ idhekacco itthī vā puriso vā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavasitvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā tāvatiṃsānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s possible that a woman or man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will—when their body breaks up, after death—be reborn in the company of the Gods of the Thirty-Three. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho panetaṃ, visākhe, sandhāya bhāsitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is what I was referring to when I said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kapaṇaṃ mānusakaṃ rajjaṃ dibbaṃ sukhaṃ upanidhāya’. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni, visākhe, mānusakāni dve vassasatāni … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Two hundred years in the human realm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri vassasatāni … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Four hundred years in the human realm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭha vassasatāni … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Eight hundred years in the human realm … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">soḷasa vassasatāni paranimmitavasavattīnaṃ devānaṃ eso eko rattindivo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sixteen hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the Gods Who Control the Creations of Others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya rattiyā tiṃsarattiyo māso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thirty such days make up a month. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena māsena dvādasamāsiyo saṃvaccharo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Twelve such months make up a year. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena saṃvaccharena dibbāni soḷasa vassasahassāni paranimmitavasavattīnaṃ devānaṃ āyuppamāṇaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The life span of the Gods Who Control the Creations of Others is sixteen thousand of these divine years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, visākhe, vijjati yaṃ idhekacco itthī vā puriso vā aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgataṃ uposathaṃ upavasitvā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā paranimmitavasavattīnaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjeyya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s possible that a woman or man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will—when their body breaks up, after death—be reborn in the company of the Gods Who Control the Creations of Others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṃ kho panetaṃ, visākhe, sandhāya bhāsitaṃ: </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is what I was referring to when I said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kapaṇaṃ mānusakaṃ rajjaṃ dibbaṃ sukhaṃ upanidhāyā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇaṃ na haññe na cadinnamādiye, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You shouldn’t kill living creatures, or steal, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musā na bhāse na ca majjapo siyā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or lie, or drink alcohol. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abrahmacariyā virameyya methunā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Be celibate, refraining from sex, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattiṃ na bhuñjeyya vikālabhojanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and don’t eat at night, the wrong time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mālaṃ na dhāre na ca gandhamācare, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not wearing garlands or applying perfumes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañce chamāyaṃ va sayetha santhate; </span></p>
<p class="p3">you should sleep on a low bed, or a mat on the ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etañhi aṭṭhaṅgikamāhuposathaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the eight-factored sabbath, they say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddhena dukkhantagunā pakāsitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">explained by the Buddha, who has gone to suffering’s end. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cando ca suriyo ca ubho sudassanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The moon and sun are both fair to see, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Obhāsayaṃ anupariyanti yāvatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">radiating as far as they revolve. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamonudā te pana antalikkhagā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those shining ones in the sky light up the quarters, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nabhe pabhāsanti disāvirocanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">dispelling the darkness as they traverse the heavens. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etasmiṃ yaṃ vijjati antare dhanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">All of the wealth that’s found in this realm—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muttā maṇi veḷuriyañca bhaddakaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">pearls, gems, fine beryl too, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siṅgīsuvaṇṇaṃ atha vāpi kañcanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">horn-gold or mountain gold, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ jātarūpaṃ haṭakanti vuccati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or natural gold dug up by marmots—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhaṅgupetassa uposathassa, </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’re not worth a sixteenth part </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalampi te nānubhavanti soḷasiṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">of the sabbath with its eight factors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Candappabhā tāragaṇā ca sabbe. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as all the constellations of stars can’t equal the light of the moon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā hi nārī ca naro ca sīlavā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So an ethical woman or man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhaṅgupetaṃ upavassuposathaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who has observed the eight-factored sabbath, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puññāni katvāna sukhudrayāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">having made merit whose outcome is happiness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aninditā saggamupenti ṭhānan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">blameless, they go to a heavenly place.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
