<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.040-40. Duccaritavipākasutta  - 40. The Results of Misconduct </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.040. 40. Duccaritavipākasutta  - 40. The Results of Misconduct </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Dānavagga  - 4. Giving </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pāṇātipāto, bhikkhave, āsevito bhāvito bahulīkato nirayasaṃvattaniko tiracchānayonisaṃvattaniko pettivisayasaṃvattaniko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, the killing of living creatures, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sabbalahuso pāṇātipātassa vipāko, manussabhūtassa appāyukasaṃvattaniko hoti. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The minimum result it leads to for a human being is a short life span. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādānaṃ, bhikkhave, āsevitaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ nirayasaṃvattanikaṃ tiracchānayonisaṃvattanikaṃ pettivisayasaṃvattanikaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Stealing, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sabbalahuso adinnādānassa vipāko, manussabhūtassa bhogabyasanasaṃvattaniko hoti. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The minimum result it leads to for a human being is loss of wealth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāmesumicchācāro, bhikkhave, āsevito bhāvito bahulīkato nirayasaṃvattaniko tiracchānayonisaṃvattaniko pettivisayasaṃvattaniko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sexual misconduct, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sabbalahuso kāmesumicchācārassa vipāko, manussabhūtassa sapattaverasaṃvattaniko hoti. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The minimum result it leads to for a human being is rivalry and enmity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādo, bhikkhave, āsevito bhāvito bahulīkato nirayasaṃvattaniko tiracchānayonisaṃvattaniko pettivisayasaṃvattaniko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Lying, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sabbalahuso musāvādassa vipāko, manussabhūtassa abhūtabbhakkhānasaṃvattaniko hoti. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The minimum result it leads to for a human being is false accusations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pisuṇā, bhikkhave, vācā āsevitā bhāvitā bahulīkatā nirayasaṃvattanikā tiracchānayonisaṃvattanikā pettivisayasaṃvattanikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Divisive speech, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sabbalahuso pisuṇāya vācāya vipāko, manussabhūtassa mittehi bhedanasaṃvattaniko hoti. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The minimum result it leads to for a human being is being divided against friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pharusā, bhikkhave, vācā āsevitā bhāvitā bahulīkatā nirayasaṃvattanikā tiracchānayonisaṃvattanikā pettivisayasaṃvattanikā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Harsh speech, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sabbalahuso pharusāya vācāya vipāko, manussabhūtassa amanāpasaddasaṃvattaniko hoti. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The minimum result it leads to for a human being is hearing disagreeable things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samphappalāpo, bhikkhave, āsevito bhāvito bahulīkato nirayasaṃvattaniko tiracchānayonisaṃvattaniko pettivisayasaṃvattaniko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Talking nonsense, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sabbalahuso samphappalāpassa vipāko, manussabhūtassa anādeyyavācāsaṃvattaniko hoti. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The minimum result it leads to for a human being is that no-one takes what you say seriously. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāmerayapānaṃ, bhikkhave, āsevitaṃ bhāvitaṃ bahulīkataṃ nirayasaṃvattanikaṃ tiracchānayonisaṃvattanikaṃ pettivisayasaṃvattanikaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Taking alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo sabbalahuso surāmerayapānassa vipāko, manussabhūtassa ummattakasaṃvattaniko hotī”ti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">The minimum result it leads to for a human being is madness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dānavaggo catuttho. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve dānāni vatthuñca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khettaṃ dānūpapattiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiriyaṃ dve sappurisā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhisando vipāko cāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
