<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.066-66. Vimokkhasutta  - 66. Liberations </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.066. 66. Vimokkhasutta  - 66. Liberations </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Bhūmicālavagga  - 7. Earthquakes </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhime, bhikkhave, vimokkhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, there are these eight liberations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpī rūpāni passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having physical form, they see visions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ paṭhamo vimokkho. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first liberation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattaṃ arūpasaññī, bahiddhā rūpāni passati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Not perceiving form internally, they see visions externally. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ dutiyo vimokkho. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second liberation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Subhanteva adhimutto hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">They’re focused only on beauty. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ tatiyo vimokkho. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third liberation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso rūpasaññānaṃ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānaṃ atthaṅgamā nānattasaññānaṃ amanasikārā ‘ananto ākāso’ti ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ catuttho vimokkho. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth liberation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘anantaṃ viññāṇan’ti viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ pañcamo vimokkho. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth liberation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ samatikkamma ‘natthi kiñcī’ti ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ chaṭṭho vimokkho. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the sixth liberation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ sattamo vimokkho. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh liberation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbaso nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ samatikkamma saññāvedayitanirodhaṃ upasampajja viharati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ aṭṭhamo vimokkho. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the eighth liberation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭha vimokkhā”ti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the eight liberations.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
