<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.016-16. Dūteyyasutta  - 16. Going on a Mission </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.016. 16. Dūteyyasutta  - 16. Going on a Mission </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">2. Mahāvagga  - 2. The Great Chapter </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu dūteyyaṃ gantumarahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with eight qualities is worthy of going on a mission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sotā ca hoti, sāvetā ca, uggahetā ca, dhāretā ca, viññātā ca, viññāpetā ca, kusalo ca sahitāsahitassa, no ca kalahakārako—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s a mendicant who learns and educates others. They memorize and help others remember. They understand and help others understand. They’re skilled at knowing what’s on topic and what isn’t. And they don’t cause quarrels. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu dūteyyaṃ gantumarahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these eight qualities is worthy of going on a mission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato sāriputto dūteyyaṃ gantumarahati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having eight qualities Sāriputta is worthy of going on a mission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, sāriputto sotā ca hoti, sāvetā ca, uggahetā ca, dhāretā ca, viññātā ca, viññāpetā ca, kusalo ca sahitāsahitassa, no ca kalahakārako. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He learns and educates others. He memorizes and helps others remember. He understands and helps others understand. He’s skilled at knowing what’s on topic and what isn’t. And he doesn’t cause quarrels. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato sāriputto dūteyyaṃ gantumarahatīti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having these eight qualities Sāriputta is worthy of going on a mission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo ve na byathati patvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t tremble when arriving </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parisaṃ uggavādiniṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">at an assembly of fierce debaters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca hāpeti vacanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They don’t omit any words, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca chādeti sāsanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">or conceal the instructions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asandiddhañca bhaṇati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Their words aren’t poisoned, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pucchito na ca kuppati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and they don’t tremble when questioned. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa ve tādisako bhikkhu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a mendicant </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dūteyyaṃ gantumarahatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">is worthy of going on a mission.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
