<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.034-34. Khettasutta  - 34. A Field </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.034. 34. Khettasutta  - 34. A Field </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">4. Dānavagga  - 4. Giving </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgate, bhikkhave, khette bījaṃ vuttaṃ na mahapphalaṃ hoti na mahassādaṃ na phātiseyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, when a field has eight factors a seed sown in it is not very fruitful or rewarding or productive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgate? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight factors does it have? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, khettaṃ unnāmaninnāmi ca hoti, pāsāṇasakkharikañca hoti, ūsarañca hoti, na ca gambhīrasitaṃ hoti, na āyasampannaṃ hoti, na apāyasampannaṃ hoti, na mātikāsampannaṃ hoti, na mariyādasampannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a field has mounds and ditches. It has stones and gravel. It’s salty. It doesn’t have deep furrows. And it’s not equipped with water inlets, water outlets, irrigation channels, and boundaries. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgate, bhikkhave, khette bījaṃ vuttaṃ na mahapphalaṃ hoti na mahassādaṃ na phātiseyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a field has these eight factors a seed sown in it is not fruitful or rewarding or productive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgatesu samaṇabrāhmaṇesu dānaṃ dinnaṃ na mahapphalaṃ hoti na mahānisaṃsaṃ na mahājutikaṃ na mahāvipphāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when an ascetic or brahmin has eight factors a gift given to them is not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or bountiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgatesu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight factors do they have? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, samaṇabrāhmaṇā micchādiṭṭhikā honti, micchāsaṅkappā, micchāvācā, micchākammantā, micchāājīvā, micchāvāyāmā, micchāsatino, micchāsamādhino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when an ascetic or brahmin has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgatesu, bhikkhave, samaṇabrāhmaṇesu dānaṃ dinnaṃ na mahapphalaṃ hoti na mahānisaṃsaṃ na mahājutikaṃ na mahāvipphāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an ascetic or brahmin has these eight factors a gift given to them is not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or bountiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgate, bhikkhave, khette bījaṃ vuttaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti mahassādaṃ phātiseyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a field has eight factors a seed sown in it is very fruitful and rewarding and productive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgate? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight factors does it have? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, khettaṃ anunnāmāninnāmi ca hoti, apāsāṇasakkharikañca hoti, anūsarañca hoti, gambhīrasitaṃ hoti, āyasampannaṃ hoti, apāyasampannaṃ hoti, mātikāsampannaṃ hoti, mariyādasampannaṃ hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a field doesn’t have mounds and ditches. It doesn’t have stones and gravel. It’s not salty. It has deep furrows. And it’s equipped with water inlets, water outlets, irrigation channels, and boundaries. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgate, bhikkhave, khette bījaṃ vuttaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti mahassādaṃ phātiseyyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When a field has these eight factors a seed sown in it is very fruitful and rewarding and productive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgatesu samaṇabrāhmaṇesu dānaṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti mahānisaṃsaṃ mahājutikaṃ mahāvipphāraṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In the same way, when an ascetic or brahmin has eight factors a gift given to them is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgatesu? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight factors do they have? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammādiṭṭhikā honti, sammāsaṅkappā, sammāvācā, sammākammantā, sammāājīvā, sammāvāyāmā, sammāsatino, sammāsamādhino. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when an ascetic or brahmin has right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgatesu, bhikkhave, samaṇabrāhmaṇesu dānaṃ dinnaṃ mahapphalaṃ hoti mahānisaṃsaṃ mahājutikaṃ mahāvipphāranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When an ascetic or brahmin has these eight factors a gift given to them is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathāpi khette sampanne, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When the field is excellent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavuttā bījasampadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the seed sown in it is excellent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Deve sampādayantamhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and the rainfall is excellent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hoti dhaññassa sampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the crop of grain will be excellent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anītisampadā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Its health is excellent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">virūḷhī bhavati sampadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">its growth is excellent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vepullasampadā hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">its maturation is excellent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phalaṃ ve hoti sampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and its fruit is excellent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ sampannasīlesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So too, when you give excellent food </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dinnā bhojanasampadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">to those of excellent ethics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sampadānaṃ upaneti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">it leads to many excellences, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sampannaṃ hissa taṃ kataṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">for what you did was excellent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā sampadamākaṅkhī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So if a person wants excellence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sampannatthūdha puggalo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">let them excel in this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sampannapaññe sevetha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">You should frequent those with excellent wisdom, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṃ ijjhanti sampadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so that your own excellence will flourish. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vijjācaraṇasampanne, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Excelling in knowledge and conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">laddhā cittassa sampadaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and having excellence of mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karoti kammasampadaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you perform excellent deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">labhati catthasampadaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and gain excellent benefits. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lokaṃ ñatvā yathābhūtaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Truly knowing the world, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pappuyya diṭṭhisampadaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and having attained excellence of view, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maggasampadamāgamma, </span></p>
<p class="p3">one who excels in mind proceeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāti sampannamānaso. </span></p>
<p class="p3">relying on excellence in the path. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Odhunitvā malaṃ sabbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Shaking off all stains, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">patvā nibbānasampadaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and attaining the excellence of extinguishment, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Muccati sabbadukkhehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">you’re freed from all sufferings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sā hoti sabbasampadā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is complete excellence.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
