<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.004-4. Dutiyaappiyasutta  - 4. Disliked (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.004. 4. Dutiyaappiyasutta  - 4. Disliked (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Mettāvagga  - 1. Love </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with eight qualities is disliked and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu lābhakāmo ca hoti, sakkārakāmo ca, anavaññattikāmo ca, akālaññū ca, amattaññū ca, asuci ca, bahubhāṇī ca, akkosakaparibhāsako ca sabrahmacārīnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant desires material possessions, honor, and to be looked up to. They know neither moderation nor the proper time. Their conduct is impure, they talk a lot, and they insult and abuse their spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these eight qualities is disliked and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with eight qualities is liked and approved by their spiritual companions, and respected and admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na lābhakāmo ca hoti, na sakkārakāmo ca, na anavaññattikāmo ca, kālaññū ca, mattaññū ca, suci ca, na bahubhāṇī ca, anakkosakaparibhāsako ca sabrahmacārīnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t desire material possessions, honor, and to be looked up to. They know moderation and the proper time. Their conduct is pure, they don’t talk a lot, and they don’t insult and abuse their spiritual companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these eight qualities is liked and approved by their spiritual companions, and respected and admired.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
