<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.060-60. Dutiyapuggalasutta  - 60. Eight People (2nd) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.060. 60. Dutiyapuggalasutta  - 60. Eight People (2nd) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">6. Gotamīvagga  - 6. Gotamī </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhime, bhikkhave, puggalā āhuneyyā … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, these eight people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotāpanno, sotāpattiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanno … pe … arahā, arahattāya paṭipanno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The stream-enterer and the one practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry. The once-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit of once-return. The non-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. The perfected one, and the one practicing for perfection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭha puggalā āhuneyyā … pe … anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the eight people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattāro ca paṭipannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Four practicing the path, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro ca phale ṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and four established in the fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esa saṅgho samukkaṭṭho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the exalted Saṅgha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattānaṃ aṭṭha puggalā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the eight people among sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yajamānānaṃ manussānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For humans, those merit-seeking creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puññapekkhāna pāṇinaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">who sponsor sacrifices, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karotaṃ opadhikaṃ puññaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">making merit with attachments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ettha dinnaṃ mahapphalan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what’s given here is very fruitful.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gotamīvaggo paṭhamo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gotamī ovādaṃ saṅkhittaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dīghajāṇu ca ujjayo; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhayā dve āhuneyyā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve ca aṭṭha puggalāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
