<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.003-3. Paṭhamaappiyasutta  - 3. Disliked (1st) </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.003. 3. Paṭhamaappiyasutta  - 3. Disliked (1st) </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">1. Mettāvagga  - 1. Love </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, a mendicant with eight qualities is disliked and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu appiyapasaṃsī ca hoti, piyagarahī ca, lābhakāmo ca, sakkārakāmo ca, ahiriko ca, anottappī ca, pāpiccho ca, micchādiṭṭhi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant praises the disliked and criticizes the liked. They desire material possessions and honor. They lack conscience and prudence. They have wicked desires and wrong view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ appiyo ca hoti amanāpo ca agaru ca abhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these eight qualities is disliked and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with eight qualities is liked and approved by their spiritual companions, and respected and admired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamehi aṭṭhahi? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu na appiyapasaṃsī ca hoti, na piyagarahī ca, na lābhakāmo ca, na sakkārakāmo ca, hirīmā ca hoti, ottappī ca, appiccho ca, sammādiṭṭhi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s when a mendicant doesn’t praise the disliked and criticize the liked. They don’t desire material possessions and honor. They have conscience and prudence. They have few desires and right view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">A mendicant with these eight qualities is liked and approved by their spiritual companions, and respected and admired.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
