<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>8.070-70. Bhūmicālasutta  - 70. Earthquakes </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">8.070. 70. Bhūmicālasutta  - 70. Earthquakes </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4">7. Bhūmicālavagga  - 7. Earthquakes </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya vesāliṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vesāliyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after the meal, on his return from alms-round, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gaṇhāhi, ānanda, nisīdanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, get your sitting cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yena cāpālaṃ cetiyaṃ tenupasaṅkamissāma divāvihārāyā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Let’s go to the Cāpāla shrine for the day’s meditation.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paṭissutvā nisīdanaṃ ādāya bhagavantaṃ piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandhi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Ānanda. Taking his sitting cloth he followed behind the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā yena cāpālaṃ cetiyaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha went up to the Cāpāla shrine, where he sat on the seat spread out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he was seated he said to Venerable Ānanda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ramaṇīyā, ānanda, vesālī, ramaṇīyaṃ udenaṃ cetiyaṃ, ramaṇīyaṃ gotamakaṃ cetiyaṃ, ramaṇīyaṃ sattambaṃ cetiyaṃ, ramaṇīyaṃ bahuputtakaṃ cetiyaṃ; ramaṇīyaṃ sārandadaṃ cetiyaṃ, ramaṇīyaṃ cāpālaṃ cetiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Sattamba, Bahuputta, Sārandada, and Cāpāla shrines are all lovely. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, ānanda, cattāro iddhipādā bhāvitā bahulīkatā yānīkatā vatthukatā anuṭṭhitā paricitā susamāraddhā, ākaṅkhamāno so, ānanda, kappaṃ vā tiṭṭheyya kappāvasesaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power—made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them—may, if they wish, live on for the eon or what’s left of the eon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa kho, ānanda, cattāro iddhipādā bhāvitā bahulīkatā yānīkatā vatthukatā anuṭṭhitā paricitā susamāraddhā. Ākaṅkhamāno, ānanda, tathāgato kappaṃ vā tiṭṭheyya kappāvasesaṃ vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live on for the eon or what’s left of the eon.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho āyasmā ānando bhagavatā oḷārike nimitte kayiramāne oḷārike obhāse kayiramāne nāsakkhi paṭivijjhituṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But Ānanda didn’t get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious hint, such a clear sign. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na bhagavantaṃ yāci: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He didn’t beg the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tiṭṭhatu, bhante, bhagavā kappaṃ, tiṭṭhatu sugato kappaṃ bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānan”ti, yathā taṃ mārena pariyuṭṭhitacitto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Blessed One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” For his mind was as if possessed by Māra. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">For a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And for a third time, the Buddha said to him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ramaṇīyā, ānanda, vesālī, ramaṇīyaṃ udenaṃ cetiyaṃ, ramaṇīyaṃ gotamakaṃ cetiyaṃ, ramaṇīyaṃ sattambaṃ cetiyaṃ, ramaṇīyaṃ bahuputtakaṃ cetiyaṃ, ramaṇīyaṃ sārandadaṃ cetiyaṃ, ramaṇīyaṃ cāpālaṃ cetiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Sattamba, Bahuputta, Sārandada, and Cāpāla shrines are all lovely. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassa kassaci, ānanda, cattāro iddhipādā bhāvitā bahulīkatā yānīkatā vatthukatā anuṭṭhitā paricitā susamāraddhā, ākaṅkhamāno so, ānanda, kappaṃ vā tiṭṭheyya kappāvasesaṃ vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Whoever has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power—made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them—may, if they wish, live on for the eon or what’s left of the eon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāgatassa kho, ānanda, cattāro iddhipādā bhāvitā … pe … ākaṅkhamāno, ānanda, tathāgato kappaṃ vā tiṭṭheyya kappāvasesaṃ vā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Realized One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live on for the eon or what’s left of the eon.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evampi kho āyasmā ānando bhagavatā oḷārike nimitte kayiramāne oḷārike obhāse kayiramāne nāsakkhi paṭivijjhituṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But Ānanda didn’t get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious hint, such a clear sign. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na bhagavantaṃ yāci: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He didn’t beg the Buddha, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tiṭṭhatu, bhante, bhagavā kappaṃ, tiṭṭhatu sugato kappaṃ bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānan”ti, yathā taṃ mārena pariyuṭṭhitacitto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Blessed One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” For his mind was as if possessed by Māra. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gaccha tvaṃ, ānanda, yassadāni kālaṃ maññasī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Go now, Ānanda, at your convenience.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṃ, bhante”ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paṭissutvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā bhagavato avidūre aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle nisīdi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, sir,” replied Ānanda. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before sitting at the root of a tree close by. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho māro pāpimā acirapakkante āyasmante ānande bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">And then, not long after Ānanda had left, Māra the Wicked said to the Buddha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Parinibbātu dāni, bhante, bhagavā, parinibbātu sugato. Parinibbānakālo dāni, bhante, bhagavato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, may the Blessed One now become fully extinguished! May the Holy One now become fully extinguished! Now is the time for the Buddha to become fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsitā kho panesā, bhante, bhagavatā vācā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, you once made this statement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na tāvāhaṃ, pāpima, parinibbāyissāmi yāva me bhikkhū na sāvakā bhavissanti viyattā vinītā visāradā pattayogakkhemā bahussutā dhammadharā dhammānudhammappaṭipannā sāmīcippaṭipannā anudhammacārino, sakaṃ ācariyakaṃ uggahetvā ācikkhissanti desessanti paññapessanti paṭṭhapessanti vivarissanti vibhajissanti uttānīkarissanti uppannaṃ parappavādaṃ sahadhammena suniggahitaṃ niggahetvā sappāṭihāriyaṃ dhammaṃ desessantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wicked One, I will not become fully extinguished until I have monk disciples who are competent, educated, assured, learned, have memorized the teachings, and practice in line with the teachings; not until they practice appropriately, living in line with the teaching; not until they’ve learned their tradition, and explain, teach, assert, establish, open, analyze, and make it clear; not until they can legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of others that come up, and teach with a demonstrable basis.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhante, bhikkhū bhagavato sāvakā viyattā vinītā visāradā pattayogakkhemā bahussutā dhammadharā dhammānudhammappaṭipannā sāmīcippaṭipannā anudhammacārino, sakaṃ ācariyakaṃ uggahetvā ācikkhanti desenti paññapenti paṭṭhapenti vivaranti vibhajanti uttānīkaronti uppannaṃ parappavādaṃ sahadhammena suniggahitaṃ niggahetvā sappāṭihāriyaṃ dhammaṃ desenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Today you do have such monk disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbātu dāni, bhante, bhagavā, parinibbātu sugato. Parinibbānakālo dāni, bhante, bhagavato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">May the Blessed One now become fully extinguished! May the Holy One now become fully extinguished! Now is the time for the Buddha to become fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsitā kho panesā, bhante, bhagavatā vācā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, you once made this statement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na tāvāhaṃ, pāpima, parinibbāyissāmi yāva me bhikkhuniyo na sāvikā bhavissanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wicked One, I will not become fully extinguished until I have nun disciples who are competent, educated, assured, learned …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāva me upāsakā na sāvakā bhavissanti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wicked One, I will not become fully extinguished until I have layman disciples who are competent, educated, assured, learned …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāva me upāsikā na sāvikā bhavissanti viyattā vinītā visāradā pattayogakkhemā bahussutā dhammadharā dhammānudhammappaṭipannā sāmīcippaṭipannā anudhammacāriniyo, sakaṃ ācariyakaṃ uggahetvā ācikkhissanti desessanti paññapessanti paṭṭhapessanti vivarissanti vibhajissanti uttānīkarissanti, uppannaṃ parappavādaṃ sahadhammena suniggahitaṃ niggahetvā sappāṭihāriyaṃ dhammaṃ desessantī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wicked One, I will not become fully extinguished until I have laywoman disciples who are competent, educated, assured, learned …’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhante, upāsikā bhagavato sāvikā viyattā vinītā visāradā pattayogakkhemā bahussutā dhammadharā dhammānudhammappaṭipannā sāmīcippaṭipannā anudhammacāriniyo, sakaṃ ācariyakaṃ uggahetvā ācikkhanti desenti paññapenti paṭṭhapenti vivaranti vibhajanti uttānīkaronti, uppannaṃ parappavādaṃ sahadhammena suniggahitaṃ niggahetvā sappāṭihāriyaṃ dhammaṃ desenti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Today you do have such laywoman disciples. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbātu dāni, bhante, bhagavā, parinibbātu sugato. Parinibbānakālo dāni, bhante, bhagavato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, may the Blessed One now become fully extinguished! May the Holy One become fully extinguished! Now is the time for the Buddha to become fully extinguished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhāsitā kho panesā, bhante, bhagavatā vācā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, you once made this statement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na tāvāhaṃ, pāpima, parinibbāyissāmi yāva me idaṃ brahmacariyaṃ na iddhañceva bhavissati phītañca vitthārikaṃ bāhujaññaṃ puthubhūtaṃ, yāva devamanussehi suppakāsitan’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Wicked One, I will not become fully extinguished until my spiritual path is successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etarahi, bhante, bhagavato brahmacariyaṃ iddhañceva phītañca vitthārikaṃ bāhujaññaṃ puthubhūtaṃ, yāva devamanussehi suppakāsitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Today your spiritual path is successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parinibbātu dāni, bhante, bhagavā, parinibbātu sugato. Parinibbānakālo dāni, bhante, bhagavato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Sir, may the Blessed One now become fully extinguished! May the Holy One become fully extinguished! Now is the time for the Buddha to become fully extinguished.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Appossukko tvaṃ, pāpima, hohi. Naciraṃ tathāgatassa parinibbānaṃ bhavissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Relax, Wicked One. The final extinguishment of the Realized One will be soon. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ito tiṇṇaṃ māsānaṃ accayena tathāgato parinibbāyissatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Three months from now the Realized One will finally be extinguished.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā cāpāle cetiye sato sampajāno āyusaṅkhāraṃ ossaji. </span></p>
<p class="p3">So at the Cāpāla tree shrine the Buddha, mindful and aware, surrendered the life force. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ossaṭṭhe ca bhagavatā āyusaṅkhāre mahābhūmicālo ahosi bhiṃsanako salomahaṃso, devadundubhiyo ca phaliṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he did so there was a great earthquake, awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etamatthaṃ viditvā tāyaṃ velāyaṃ imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, knowing the meaning of this, on that occasion the Buddha was inspired to exclaim: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tulamatulañca sambhavaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Weighing up the incomparable against an extension of life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavasaṅkhāramavassaji muni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the sage surrendered the life force. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhattarato samāhito, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Happy inside, serene, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhindi kavacamivattasambhavan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he burst out of this self-made chain like a suit of armor.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato ānandassa etadahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahā vatāyaṃ bhūmicālo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“That was a really big earthquake! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sumahā vatāyaṃ bhūmicālo bhiṃsanako salomahaṃso, devadundubhiyo ca phaliṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That was really a very big earthquake; awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko nu kho hetu, ko paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s the cause, what’s the reason for a great earthquake?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahā vatāyaṃ, bhante, bhūmicālo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, that was a really big earthquake! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sumahā vatāyaṃ, bhante, bhūmicālo bhiṃsanako salomahaṃso, devadundubhiyo ca phaliṃsu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That was really a very big earthquake; awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāyā”ti? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What’s the cause, what’s the reason for a great earthquake?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Aṭṭhime, ānanda, hetū, aṭṭha paccayā mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Ānanda, there are these eight causes and reasons for a great earthquake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katame aṭṭha? </span></p>
<p class="p3">What eight? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, mahāpathavī udake patiṭṭhitā; udakaṃ vāte patiṭṭhitaṃ; vāto ākāsaṭṭho hoti. So, ānanda, samayo yaṃ mahāvātā vāyanti; mahāvātā vāyantā udakaṃ kampenti; udakaṃ kampitaṃ pathaviṃ kampeti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This great earth is grounded on water, the water is grounded on air, and the air stands in space. At a time when a great wind blows, it stirs the water, and the water stirs the earth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, paṭhamo hetu, paṭhamo paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāya. (1) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the first cause and reason for a great earthquake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā iddhimā cetovasippatto devatā vā mahiddhikā mahānubhāvā. Tassa parittā pathavīsaññā bhāvitā hoti, appamāṇā āposaññā. So imaṃ pathaviṃ kampeti saṅkampeti sampakampeti sampavedheti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, there is an ascetic or brahmin with psychic power who has achieved mastery of the mind, or a god who is mighty and powerful. They’ve developed a limited perception of earth and a limitless perception of water. They make the earth shake and rock and tremble. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, dutiyo hetu, dutiyo paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāya. (2) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the second cause and reason for a great earthquake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, yadā bodhisatto tusitā kāyā cavitvā sato sampajāno mātukucchiṃ okkamati, tadāyaṃ pathavī kampati saṅkampati sampakampati sampavedhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening passes away from the host of Joyful Gods, he’s conceived in his mother’s belly, mindful and aware. Then the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, tatiyo hetu, tatiyo paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāya. (3) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the third cause and reason for a great earthquake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, yadā bodhisatto sato sampajāno mātukucchismā nikkhamati, tadāyaṃ pathavī kampati saṅkampati sampakampati sampavedhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening comes out of his mother’s belly mindful and aware, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, catuttho hetu, catuttho paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāya. (4) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fourth cause and reason for a great earthquake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, yadā tathāgato anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambujjhati, tadāyaṃ pathavī kampati saṅkampati sampakampati sampavedhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, when the Realized One realizes the supreme perfect awakening, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, pañcamo hetu, pañcamo paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāya. (5) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the fifth cause and reason for a great earthquake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, yadā tathāgato anuttaraṃ dhammacakkaṃ pavatteti, tadāyaṃ pathavī kampati saṅkampati sampakampati sampavedhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, when the Realized One rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, chaṭṭho hetu, chaṭṭho paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāya. (6) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the sixth cause and reason for a great earthquake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, yadā tathāgato sato sampajāno āyusaṅkhāraṃ ossajjati, tadāyaṃ pathavī kampati saṅkampati sampakampati sampavedhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, when the Realized One, mindful and aware, surrenders the life force, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, sattamo hetu, sattamo paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāya. (7) </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the seventh cause and reason for a great earthquake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, ānanda, yadā tathāgato anupādisesāya nibbānadhātuyā parinibbāyati, tadāyaṃ pathavī kampati saṅkampati sampakampati sampavedhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Furthermore, when the Realized One becomes fully extinguished through the natural principle of extinguishment, without anything left over, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ, ānanda, aṭṭhamo hetu, aṭṭhamo paccayo mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the eighth cause and reason for a great earthquake. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho, ānanda, aṭṭha hetū, aṭṭha paccayā mahato bhūmicālassa pātubhāvāyā”ti. (8) </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the eight causes and reasons for a great earthquake.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūmicālavaggo dutiyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Icchā alañca saṅkhittaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gayā abhibhunā saha; </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vimokkho dve ca vohārā, </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parisā bhūmicālenāti. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
