<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc23_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">23. Bhikkhunupassayasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">23. The training rule on the nuns’ dwelling place </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sakkesu viharati kapilavatthusmiṁ nigrodhārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying in the Sakyan country in the Banyan Tree Monastery at Kapilavatthu, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo ovadanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six went to the nuns’ dwelling place and instructed the nuns from the group of six. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the nuns said to the nuns from the group of six, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ethāyye, ovādaṁ gamissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Venerables, let’s go to the instruction.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi mayaṁ, ayye, gaccheyyāma ovādassa kāraṇā, ayyā chabbaggiyā idheva āgantvā amhe ovadantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There’s no need. The monks from the group of six came and instructed us right here.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns complained and criticized the monks from the group of six, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā bhikkhuniyo ovadissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six go and instruct the nuns at their dwelling place?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The those nuns told the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā bhikkhuniyo ovadissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those monks do this?”… </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā bhikkhuniyo ovadathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā bhikkhuniyo ovadissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā bhikkhuniyo ovadeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk goes to the nuns’ dwelling place, and then instructs them, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena mahāpajāpati gotamī gilānā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards Mahāpajāpati Gotamī became sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Therā bhikkhū yena mahāpajāpati gotamī tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">The senior monks went to see her </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā mahāpajāpatiṁ gotamiṁ etadavocuṁ—“</span></p>
<p class="p3">and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kacci, gotami, khamanīyaṁ, kacci yāpanīyan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We hope you’re bearing up, Gotamī, we hope you’re getting better?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, ayyā, khamanīyaṁ na yāpanīyaṁ”.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m not bearing up, Venerables, and I’m not getting better. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iṅghayyā, dhammaṁ desethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please give me a teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na, bhagini, kappati bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā bhikkhuniyo dhammaṁ desetun”ti kukkuccāyantā na desesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s not allowable for us to go and teach the nuns at their dwelling place.” And being afraid of wrongdoing, they did not teach her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena mahāpajāpati gotamī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards, after robing up in the morning, the Buddha took his bowl and robe and went to Mahāpajāpati Gotamī, where he sat down on the prepared seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajja kho bhagavā mahāpajāpatiṁ gotamiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, gotami, khamanīyaṁ, kacci yāpanīyan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you’re bearing up, Gotamī, I hope you’re getting better?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbe me, bhante, therā bhikkhū āgantvā dhammaṁ desenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Previously, Venerable Sir, the senior monks would come and teach me, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena me phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and because of that I would be comfortable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idāni pana—‘bhagavatā paṭikkhittan’ti, kukkuccāyantā na desenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But now that this has been prohibited by the Buddha, they don’t teach because they’re afraid of wrongdoing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena me na phāsu hotī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of that I’m not comfortable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā mahāpajāpatiṁ gotamiṁ dhammiyā kathāya sandassetvā samādapetvā samuttejetvā sampahaṁsetvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After instructing, inspiring, and gladdening her with a teaching, the Buddha got up from his seat and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā gilānaṁ bhikkhuniṁ ovadituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to go and instruct a sick nun at her dwelling place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā bhikkhuniyo ovadeyya, aññatra samayā, pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk goes to the nuns’ dwelling place and then instructs them, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyaṁ samayo. Gilānā hoti bhikkhunī—ayaṁ tattha samayo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the appropriate occasion: a nun is sick.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunupassayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns’ dwelling place: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha bhikkhuniyo ekarattampi vasanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wherever nuns stay, even for a single night. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasaṅkamitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Goes to: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha gantvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">goes there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovadeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Instructs: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhahi garudhammehi ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he instructs about the eight important principles, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra samayāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except on an appropriate occasion: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā samayaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless it is an appropriate occasion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā nāma bhikkhunī</span></p>
<p class="p3">A sick nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkoti ovādāya vā saṁvāsāya vā gantuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is not able to go to the instruction or to a formal meeting of the community. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññī bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā aññatra samayā ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is fully ordained, and he perceives her as such, and he goes to her dwelling place and then instructs her, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematiko bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā aññatra samayā ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he goes to her dwelling place and then instructs her, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññī bhikkhunupassayaṁ upasaṅkamitvā aññatra samayā ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is fully ordained, but he does not perceive her as such, and he goes to her dwelling place and then instructs her, except on an appropriate occasion, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena dhammena ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he instructs her with another teaching, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoupasampannāya ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he instructs a nun who is fully ordained only on one side, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not fully ordained, but he perceives her as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive her as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is an appropriate occasion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddesaṁ dento,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he recites; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paripucchaṁ dento,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he tests them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“osārehi ayyā”ti vuccamāno osāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he recites when asked to do so; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañhaṁ pucchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks a question; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañhaṁ puṭṭho katheti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he replies when asked a question; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya bhaṇantaṁ bhikkhuniyo suṇanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is speaking for the benefit of someone else and the nuns listen in; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhamānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is to a trainee nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇeriyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is to a novice nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunupassayasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on the nuns’ dwelling place, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
