<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc21_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">21. Ovādasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">21. The training rule on the instruction </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadantā lābhino honti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the senior monks who were instructing the nuns received robes, almsfood, dwellings, and medicines. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the monks from the group of six found out about this, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etarahi kho, āvuso, therā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo ovadantā lābhino honti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handāvuso, mayampi bhikkhuniyo ovadāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they thought, “Well then, let’s instruct the nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upasaṅkamitvā etadavocuṁ—“amhepi, bhaginiyo, upasaṅkamatha; mayampi ovadissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then went to the nuns and said, “Come to us, Sisters, and we too will instruct you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo yena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards those nuns went to the monks from the group of six, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā chabbaggiye bhikkhū abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">bowed, and sat down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunīnaṁ parittaññeva dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā divasaṁ tiracchānakathāya vītināmetvā uyyojesuṁ—“gacchatha, bhaginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But after giving just a short teaching, those monks spent the day on pointless talk. They then dismissed the nuns, saying, “Go, Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ aṭṭhaṁsu. Ekamantaṁ ṭhitā kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhagavā etadavoca—“kacci, bhikkhuniyo, ovādo iddho ahosī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns went to the Buddha and bowed, and the Buddha said to them, “Nuns, I hope the instruction was effective?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kuto, bhante, ovādo iddho bhavissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Sir, how could the instruction be effective? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyā chabbaggiyā parittaññeva dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā divasaṁ tiracchānakathāya vītināmetvā uyyojesun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving just a short teaching, the monks from the group of six spent the day on pointless talk, and then dismissed us.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tā bhikkhuniyo dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṁsesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha instructed, inspired, and gladdened those nuns with a teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṁsitā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns bowed, circumambulated the Buddha with their right side toward him, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā chabbaggiye bhikkhū paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks from the group of six: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhunīnaṁ parittaññeva dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā divasaṁ tiracchānakathāya vītināmetvā uyyojethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you acted like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhunīnaṁ parittaññeva dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā divasaṁ tiracchānakathāya vītināmetvā uyyojessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vigarahitvā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and after rebuking them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, bhikkhunovādakaṁ sammannituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, you should appoint an instructor of the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, sammannitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how he should be appointed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṁ bhikkhu yācitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">First a monk should be asked </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yācitvā byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and then a competent and capable monk should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ bhikkhunovādakaṁ sammanneyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, it should appoint monk so-and-so as an instructor of the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ bhikkhunovādakaṁ sammannati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha appoints monk so-and-so as an instructor of the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno bhikkhunovādakassa sammuti, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of appointing monk so-and-so as an instructor of the nuns should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the second time I speak on this matter: … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the third time I speak on this matter: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ bhikkhunovādakaṁ sammannati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha appoints monk so-and-so as an instructor of the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno bhikkhunovādakassa sammuti, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of appointing monk so-and-so as an instructor of the nuns should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammato saṅghena itthannāmo bhikkhu bhikkhunovādako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has appointed monk so-and-so as an instructor of the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā dubbharatāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after rebuking the monks from the group of six in many ways, the Buddha spoke in dispraise of being difficult to support … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu asammato bhikkhuniyo ovadeyya pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who has not been appointed instructs the nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena therā bhikkhū sammatā bhikkhuniyo ovadantā tatheva lābhino honti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After being appointed to do so, the senior monks who instructed the nuns still received robes, almsfood, dwellings, and medicines. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When they found out about this, the monks from the group of six said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etarahi kho, āvuso, therā bhikkhū sammatā bhikkhuniyo ovadantā tatheva lābhino honti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handāvuso, mayampi nissīmaṁ gantvā aññamaññaṁ bhikkhunovādakaṁ sammannitvā bhikkhuniyo ovadāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, let’s go outside the monastic boundary, appoint each other as instructors of the nuns, and then instruct them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū nissīmaṁ gantvā aññamaññaṁ bhikkhunovādakaṁ sammannitvā bhikkhuniyo upasaṅkamitvā etadavocuṁ—“mayampi, bhaginiyo, sammatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After doing just that, they again went to the nuns and said, “Sisters, we too have been appointed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhepi upasaṅkamatha. Mayampi ovadissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Come to us, and we will instruct you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo yena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā chabbaggiye bhikkhū abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Once again the nuns went to the monks from the group of six and everything unfolded as before. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhunīnaṁ parittaññeva dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā divasaṁ tiracchānakathāya vītināmetvā uyyojesuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gacchatha, bhaginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ aṭṭhaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ ṭhitā kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhagavā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, bhikkhuniyo, ovādo iddho ahosī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kuto, bhante, ovādo iddho bhavissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyā chabbaggiyā parittaññeva dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā divasaṁ tiracchānakathāya vītināmetvā uyyojesun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā tā bhikkhuniyo dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṁsitā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā chabbaggiye bhikkhū paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha then had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks from the group of six: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhunīnaṁ parittaññeva dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā divasaṁ tiracchānakathāya vītināmetvā uyyojethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you acted like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhunīnaṁ parittaññeva dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā divasaṁ tiracchānakathāya vītināmetvā uyyojessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vigarahitvā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and after rebuking them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahaṅgehi samannāgataṁ bhikkhuṁ bhikkhunovādakaṁ sammannituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, you may appoint a monk who possesses eight qualities as an instructor of the nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṁvarasaṁvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is virtuous and restrained by the Monastic Code. His conduct is good, he associates with the right people, and he sees danger in minor faults. He undertakes and trains in the training rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṁ sabyañjanaṁ kevalaparipuṇṇaṁ parisuddhaṁ brahmacariyaṁ abhivadanti tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasā anupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">He has learned much, and he retains and accumulates what he has learned. Those teachings that are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, that have a true goal and are well articulated, and that set out the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life—he has learned many such teachings, retained them in mind, recited them verbally, mentally investigated them, and penetrated them well by view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhayāni kho panassa pātimokkhāni vitthārena svāgatāni honti suvibhattāni suppavattīni suvinicchitāni suttaso anubyañjanaso;</span></p>
<p class="p3">He has properly learned both Monastic Codes in detail. He has analyzed them well, thoroughly mastered them, and investigated them well, both in terms of the rules and their detailed exposition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kalyāṇavāco hoti kalyāṇavākkaraṇo;</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is well-spoken and has a good voice. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yebhuyyena bhikkhunīnaṁ piyo hoti manāpo;</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is generally liked by and pleasing to the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibalo hoti bhikkhuniyo ovadituṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is capable of instructing the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kho panetaṁ bhagavantaṁ uddissa pabbajitāya kāsāyavatthavasanāya garudhammaṁ ajjhāpannapubbo hoti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">He has never committed a heavy offense against a Buddhist nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vīsativasso vā hoti atirekavīsativasso vā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He has been fully ordained for at least twenty years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, imehi aṭṭhahaṅgehi samannāgataṁ bhikkhuṁ bhikkhunovādakaṁ sammannitun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monks, you may appoint a monk who possesses these eight qualities as an instructor of the nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asammato nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has not been appointed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñatticatutthena kammena asammato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has not been appointed through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they have been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovadeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Instructs: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṭṭhahi garudhammehi ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he instructs in the eight important principles, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena dhammena ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he instructs in any other teaching, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoupasampannaṁ ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he instructs a nun who is fully ordained only on one side, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena sammatena bhikkhunā pariveṇaṁ sammajjitvā pānīyaṁ paribhojanīyaṁ upaṭṭhāpetvā āsanaṁ paññapetvā dutiyaṁ gahetvā nisīditabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk who has been appointed should sweep the precincts, set out water for drinking and water for washing, prepare a seat, get hold of a companion, and then sit down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīhi tattha gantvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīditabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns should go there, bow down to the monk, and sit down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā pucchitabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk should then ask them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“samaggāttha, bhaginiyo”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sisters, are you all present?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace “samaggāmhāyyā”ti bhaṇanti, “vattanti, bhaginiyo, aṭṭha garudhammā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they say, “We’re all present, Venerable,” he should say, “Are you keeping the eight important principles?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace “vattantāyyā”ti bhaṇanti, “eso, bhaginiyo, ovādo”ti niyyādetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they say, “We are,” he should say, “This is the instruction.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace “na vattantāyyā”ti bhaṇanti, osāretabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they say, “We’re not,” he should recite the important principles: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vassasatūpasampannāya bhikkhuniyā tadahupasampannassa bhikkhuno abhivādanaṁ paccuṭṭhānaṁ añjalikammaṁ sāmīcikammaṁ kātabbaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“A nun who has been fully ordained for a hundred years should bow down to a monk who was given the full ordination on that very day, and she should stand up for him, raise her joined palms to him, and do acts of respect toward him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi dhammo sakkatvā garukatvā mānetvā pūjetvā yāvajīvaṁ anatikkamanīyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This rule is to be honored and respected all one’s life, and is not to be breached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na bhikkhuniyā abhikkhuke āvāse vassaṁ vasitabbaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun should not spend the rainy-season residence in a monastery without monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi dhammo sakkatvā garukatvā mānetvā pūjetvā yāvajīvaṁ anatikkamanīyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This rule too is to be honored and respected all one’s life, and is not to be breached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anvaddhamāsaṁ bhikkhuniyā bhikkhusaṅghato dve dhammā paccāsīsitabbā</span></p>
<p class="p3">Every half-month a nun should seek two things from the Sangha of monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uposathapucchakañca ovādūpasaṅkamanañca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">asking it about the observance day and going to it for the instruction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi dhammo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This rule too is to be honored and respected all one’s life, and is not to be breached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vassaṁ vuṭṭhāya bhikkhuniyā ubhatosaṅghe tīhi ṭhānehi pavāretabbaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun who has completed the rainy-season residence should invite correction from both Sanghas in regard to three things: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">diṭṭhena vā sutena vā parisaṅkāya vā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">what has been seen, what has been heard, and what has been suspected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi dhammo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This rule too is to be honored and respected all one’s life, and is not to be breached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">garudhammaṁ ajjhāpannāya bhikkhuniyā ubhatosaṅghe pakkhamānattaṁ caritabbaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun who has committed a heavy offense must undertake a trial period for a half-month toward both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi dhammo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This rule too is to be honored and respected all one’s life, and is not to be breached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhāya sikkhamānāya ubhatosaṅghe upasampadā pariyesitabbā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">A trainee nun who has trained in the six rules for two years may seek for full ordination in both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi dhammo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This rule too is to be honored and respected all one’s life, and is not to be breached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na bhikkhuniyā kenaci pariyāyena bhikkhu akkositabbo paribhāsitabbo;</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun may not in any way abuse or revile a monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi dhammo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This rule too is to be honored and respected all one’s life, and is not to be breached. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjatagge ovaṭo bhikkhunīnaṁ bhikkhūsu vacanapatho, anovaṭo bhikkhūnaṁ bhikkhunīsu vacanapatho;</span></p>
<p class="p3">From today onwards, nuns may not correct monks, but monks may correct nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayampi dhammo sakkatvā garukatvā mānetvā pūjetvā yāvajīvaṁ anatikkamanīyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This rule too is to be honored and respected all one’s life, and is not to be breached.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace “samaggāmhāyyā”ti bhaṇantaṁ aññaṁ dhammaṁ bhaṇati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they say, “We’re all present, Venerable,” and he instructs them with another teaching, then he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace “vaggāmhāyyā”ti bhaṇantaṁ aṭṭha garudhamme bhaṇati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they say, “We’re not all present, Venerable,” and he instructs them in the eight important principles, then he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādaṁ aniyyādetvā aññaṁ dhammaṁ bhaṇati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not give the instruction, but he gives them another teaching, then he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vematiko ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he perceives it as complete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vematiko ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he perceives it as complete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as legitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vematiko ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as legitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as legitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he perceives it as complete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he perceives it as incomplete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vematiko ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññī samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is complete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematiko samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he perceives it as incomplete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vematiko ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is complete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññī samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as legitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he perceives it as incomplete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vematiko ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as legitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as legitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is complete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as illegitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vematiko ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as illegitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as illegitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he perceives it as complete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vematiko ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he perceives it as complete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī vaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vematiko ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is incomplete but he perceives it as complete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññī samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as illegitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he perceives it as incomplete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vematiko ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as illegitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he perceives it as illegitimate, and the Sangha of nuns is complete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematiko samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he perceives it as incomplete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vematiko ovadati …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure but he is unsure of it, and the Sangha of nuns is complete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vaggasaññī ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he perceives it as incomplete, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ vematiko ovadati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is complete but he is unsure of it, then if he instructs those nuns, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññī samaggaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ samaggasaññī ovadati, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure and he perceives it as such, and the Sangha of nuns is complete and he perceives it as such, then if he instructs those nuns, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddesaṁ dento,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he recites; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paripucchaṁ dento,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he tests them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“osārehi ayyā”ti vuccamāno, osāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he recites when asked to do so; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañhaṁ pucchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks a question; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañhaṁ puṭṭho katheti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he replies when asked a question; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya bhaṇantaṁ bhikkhuniyo suṇanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is speaking for the benefit of someone else and the nuns listen in; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhamānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is to a trainee nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇeriyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is to a novice nun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ovādasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on the instruction, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
