<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc77_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">77. Sañciccasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">77. The training rule on intentionally </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sattarasavaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadahanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six intentionally made the monks from the group of seventeen anxious. They said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā, āvuso, sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha has laid down a rule </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘na ūnavīsativasso puggalo upasampādetabbo’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that a person who is less than twenty years old shouldn’t be given the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhe ca ūnavīsativassā upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And you were less than twenty when you got the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci no tumhe anupasampannā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Could it be that you’re not fully ordained?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te rodanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They cried. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other monks asked them why, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tumhe, āvuso, rodathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ime, āvuso, chabbaggiyā bhikkhū amhākaṁ sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadahantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they said, “The monks from the group of six intentionally make us anxious.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhūnaṁ sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadahissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six do this?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṁ sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadahathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhūnaṁ sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadahissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhussa sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadaheyya—‘itissa muhuttampi aphāsu bhavissatī’ti etadeva paccayaṁ karitvā anaññaṁ, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk intentionally makes a monk anxious, thinking, “In this way he will be ill at ease at least for a moment,” and he does so only for this reason and no other, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhussāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa bhikkhussa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañciccāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Intentionally: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jānanto sañjānanto cecca abhivitaritvā vītikkamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">knowing, perceiving, having intended, having decided, he transgresses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kukkuccaṁ upadaheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Makes anxious: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ūnavīsativasso maññe tvaṁ upasampanno, vikāle maññe tayā bhuttaṁ, majjaṁ maññe tayā pītaṁ, mātugāmena saddhiṁ raho maññe tayā nisinnan”ti kukkuccaṁ upadahati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes him anxious, saying, “It would seem that you were less than twenty years old when you were given the full ordination,” “It would seem that you have eaten at the wrong time,” “It would seem that you have drunk alcohol,” “It would seem that you have been sitting in private with a woman,” he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadeva paccayaṁ karitvā, anaññanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He does so only for this reason and no other: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na añño koci paccayo hoti kukkuccaṁ upadahituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is no other reason for making him anxious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadahati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is fully ordained, and he perceives him as such, and he intentionally makes him anxious, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadahati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he intentionally makes him anxious, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadahati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is fully ordained, but he does not perceive him as such, and he intentionally makes him anxious, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannassa sañcicca kukkuccaṁ upadahati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he intentionally makes one who is not fully ordained anxious, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kukkuccaṁ upadahitukāmo “ūnavīsativasso maññe tvaṁ upasampanno, vikāle maññe tayā bhuttaṁ, majjaṁ maññe tayā pītaṁ, mātugāmena saddhiṁ raho maññe tayā nisinnaṁ, iṅgha jānāhi, mā te pacchā kukkuccaṁ ahosī”ti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, not wanting to make him anxious, he says, “It would seem that you were less than twenty years old when you were given the full ordination,” “It would seem that you have eaten at the wrong time,” “It would seem that you have drunk alcohol,” “It would seem that you have been sitting in private with a woman,” and then “Find out about it, so that you don’t get anxious later;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañciccasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on intentionally, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
