<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc56_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on drinking alcohol </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">56. Jotikasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">56. The training rule on fire </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā bhaggesu viharati susumāragire bhesakaḷāvane migadāye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the Bhagga country at Susumāragira in the Bhesakaḷā Grove, the deer park. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū hemantike kāle aññataraṁ mahantaṁ susirakaṭṭhaṁ jotiṁ samādahitvā visibbesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time, during winter, the monks were warming themselves after setting fire to a hollow log. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiñca susire kaṇhasappo agginā santatto nikkhamitvā bhikkhū paripātesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Heated by the fire, a black snake came out of the log and attacked the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū tahaṁ tahaṁ upadhāviṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks ran here and there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū jotiṁ samādahitvā visibbessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those monks light a fire to warm themselves?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū jotiṁ samādahitvā visibbentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that monks did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā jotiṁ samādahitvā visibbessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu visibbanāpekkho jotiṁ samādaheyya vā samādahāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk lights a fire to warm himself, or has one lit, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū gilānā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a number of monks were sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānapucchakā bhikkhū gilāne bhikkhū etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks who were looking after them asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccāvuso, khamanīyaṁ, kacci yāpanīyan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you’re bearing up? I hope you’re getting better?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbe mayaṁ, āvuso, jotiṁ samādahitvā visibbema;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Previously we lit a fire to warm ourselves, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena no phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and then we were comfortable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idāni pana ‘bhagavatā paṭikkhittan’ti kukkuccāyantā na visibbema, tena no na phāsu hotī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But now that the Buddha has prohibited this, we don’t warm ourselves because we’re afraid of wrongdoing. Because of that we’re not comfortable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānena bhikkhunā jotiṁ samādahitvā vā samādahāpetvā vā visibbetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a sick monk to light a fire to warm himself, or to have one lit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu agilāno visibbanāpekkho jotiṁ samādaheyya vā samādahāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who is not sick lights a fire to warm himself, or has one lit, he commits an offense entailing confession.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū padīpepi jotikepi jantāgharepi kukkuccāyanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the monks did not light lamps, small fires, or saunas because they were afraid of wrongdoing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, tathārūpappaccayā jotiṁ samādahituṁ samādahāpetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to light a fire, or to have one lit, if there’s a suitable reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu agilāno visibbanāpekkho jotiṁ samādaheyya vā samādahāpeyya vā, aññatra tathārūpappaccayā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who is not sick lights a fire to warm himself, or has one lit, except if there is a suitable reason, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">…The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is not sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa vinā agginā phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is comfortable without a fire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa vinā agginā na phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is not comfortable without a fire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visibbanāpekkhoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To warm himself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tappitukāmo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wanting to heat himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Joti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A fire: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aggi vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">flames are what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādaheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lights: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ samādahati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he lights it himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādahāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has one lit: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks another, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇatto bahukampi samādahati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he only asks once, then even if the other lights many fires, he commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra tathā rūpappaccayāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except if there is a suitable reason: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā tathārūpappaccayaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless there is an suitable reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno agilānasaññī visibbanāpekkho jotiṁ samādahati vā samādahāpeti vā, aññatra tathārūpappaccayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick, and he does not perceive himself as sick, and he lights a fire to warm himself, or has one lit, except if there is an suitable reason, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno vematiko visibbanāpekkho jotiṁ samādahati vā samādahāpeti vā, aññatra tathārūpappaccayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick, but he is unsure of it, and he lights a fire to warm himself, or has one lit, except if there is an suitable reason, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno gilānasaññī visibbanāpekkho jotiṁ samādahati vā samādahāpeti vā, aññatra tathārūpappaccayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick, but he perceives himself as sick, and he lights a fire to warm himself, or has one lit, except if there is an suitable reason, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilātaṁ ukkhipati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he puts back a burning piece of wood that has fallen off, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno agilānasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is sick, but he does not perceive himself as sick, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is sick, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno gilānasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is sick, and he perceives himself as sick, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññena kataṁ visibbeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he warms himself over a fire lit by another; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vītaccitaṅgāraṁ visibbeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he warms himself over flameless coals; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padīpe jotike jantāghare tathārūpappaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he lights a lamp, a small fire, or a sauna, when there is an suitable reason; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jotikasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on fire, the sixth, is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
