<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc60_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on drinking alcohol </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">60. Cīvaraapanidhānasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">60. The training rule on hiding robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū asannihitaparikkhārā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the monks from the group of seventeen had not put away their requisites, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sattarasavaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pattampi cīvarampi apanidhenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six hid their bowls and robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattarasavaggiyā bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of seventeen said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dethāvuso, amhākaṁ pattampi cīvarampī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give us our bowls and robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū hasanti, te rodanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six laughed, but the monks from the group of seventeen cried. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks asked them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tumhe, āvuso, rodathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why are you crying?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ime, āvuso, chabbaggiyā bhikkhū amhākaṁ pattampi cīvarampi apanidhentī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because the monks from the group of six have hidden our bowls and robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhūnaṁ pattampi cīvarampi apanidhessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six hide the bowls and robes of other monks?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṁ pattampi cīvarampi apanidhethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhūnaṁ pattampi cīvarampi apanidhessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhussa pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā nisīdanaṁ vā sūcigharaṁ vā kāyabandhanaṁ vā apanidheyya vā apanidhāpeyya vā, antamaso hasāpekkhopi, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk hides a monk’s bowl, robe, sitting mat, needle case, or belt, or he has it hidden, even if just for a laugh, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhussāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk’s: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa bhikkhussa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another monk’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bowl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve pattā—ayopatto, mattikāpatto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are two kinds of bowls: iron bowls and ceramic bowls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ, vikappanupagaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robe-cloth, but not smaller than what can be transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisīdanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">sitting mat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sadasaṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one with a border is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sūcigharaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Needle case: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sasūcikaṁ vā asūcikaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">with or without needles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāyabandhanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Belt: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve kāyabandhanāni— paṭṭikā, sūkarantakaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two kinds of belts: those made from strips of cloth and those made from pigs’ intestines. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apanidheyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Hides: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ apanidheti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he hides it himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apanidhāpeyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has hidden: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpesi, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks another, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇatto bahukampi apanidheti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he only asks once, then even if the other hides many things, he commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antamaso hasāpekkhopīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even if just for a laugh: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kīḷādhippāyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">aiming to have fun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā nisīdanaṁ vā sūcigharaṁ vā kāyabandhanaṁ vā apanidheti vā apanidhāpeti vā, antamaso hasāpekkhopi, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk is fully ordained, and he perceives him as such, and he hides his bowl or robe or sitting mat or needle case or belt, or he has it hidden, even if just for a laugh, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he hides his bowl or robe or sitting mat or needle case or belt, or he has it hidden, even if just for a laugh, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampanne anupasampannasaññī pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā nisīdanaṁ vā sūcigharaṁ vā kāyabandhanaṁ vā apanidheti vā apanidhāpeti vā, antamaso hasāpekkhopi, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk is fully ordained, but he does not perceive him as such, and he hides his bowl or robe or sitting mat or needle case or belt, or he has it hidden, even if just for a laugh, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ parikkhāraṁ apanidheti vā apanidhāpeti vā, antamaso hasāpekkhopi, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he hides another requisite, or he has it hidden, even if just for a laugh, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannassa pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā aññaṁ vā parikkhāraṁ apanidheti vā apanidhāpeti vā, antamaso hasāpekkhopi, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he hides the bowl or robe or other requisite of someone who is not fully ordained, or he has it hidden, even if just for a laugh, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nahasādhippāyo,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not aiming to have fun; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dunnikkhittaṁ paṭisāmeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he puts away what has been improperly put away; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā dassāmī”ti paṭisāmeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he puts something away with the thought, “After giving a teaching, I’ll give it back;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraapanidhānasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on hiding robes, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavaggo chaṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth sub-chapter on drinking alcohol is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surā aṅguli hāso ca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Alcohol, finger, and laughter, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anādariyañca bhiṁsanaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And disrespect, scaring; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jotinahānadubbaṇṇaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fire, bathing, stain, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ apanidhena cāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Himself, and with hiding.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
