<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc72_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">72. Vilekhanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">72. The training rule on annoyance </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā bhikkhūnaṁ anekapariyāyena vinayakathaṁ katheti, vinayassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, vinayapariyattiyā vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, ādissa ādissa āyasmato upālissa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the Buddha gave many talks about the Monastic Law, spoke in praise of the Monastic Law and of learning the Monastic Law, and repeatedly praised Venerable Upāli. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the monks heard this, they thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavā kho anekapariyāyena vinayakathaṁ katheti, vinayassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, vinayapariyattiyā vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, ādissa ādissa āyasmato upālissa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handa mayaṁ, āvuso, āyasmato upālissa santike vinayaṁ pariyāpuṇāmā”ti, te ca bahū bhikkhū therā ca navā ca majjhimā ca āyasmato upālissa santike vinayaṁ pariyāpuṇanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, let’s learn the Monastic Law from Venerable Upāli.” And many monks, both senior and junior, as well as those of middle standing, learned the Monastic Law from Upāli. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etarahi kho, āvuso, bahū bhikkhū therā ca navā ca majjhimā ca āyasmato upālissa santike vinayaṁ pariyāpuṇanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">considered this and thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace ime vinaye pakataññuno bhavissanti amhe yenicchakaṁ yadicchakaṁ yāvadicchakaṁ ākaḍḍhissanti parikaḍḍhissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If these monks become well-versed in the Monastic Law, they’ll boss us around as they like. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Handa mayaṁ, āvuso, vinayaṁ vivaṇṇemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So let’s disparage the Monastic Law.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhū upasaṅkamitvā evaṁ vadanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They went to the other monks and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ panimehi khuddānukhuddakehi sikkhāpadehi uddiṭṭhehi, yāvadeva kukkuccāya vihesāya vilekhāya saṁvattantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s the point of reciting these minor and insignificant training rules, when they just lead to anxiety, oppression, and annoyance?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū vinayaṁ vivaṇṇessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six disparage the Monastic Law?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, vinayaṁ vivaṇṇethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, vinayaṁ vivaṇṇessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu pātimokkhe uddissamāne evaṁ vadeyya—‘kiṁ panimehi khuddānukhuddakehi sikkhāpadehi uddiṭṭhehi, yāvadeva kukkuccāya vihesāya vilekhāya saṁvattantī’ti, sikkhāpadavivaṇṇake pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When the Monastic Code is being recited, if a monk says, “What’s the point of reciting these minor and insignificant training rules, when they just lead to anxiety, oppression, and annoyance?” then in disparaging the training rules, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pātimokkhe uddissamāneti</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the Monastic Code is being recited: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddisante vā uddisāpente vā sajjhāyaṁ vā karonte.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when reciting it, when having it recited, or when practicing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vadeyyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ panimehi khuddānukhuddakehi sikkhāpadehi uddiṭṭhehi, yāvadeva kukkuccāya vihesāya vilekhāya saṁvattantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s the point of reciting these minor and insignificant training rules, when they just lead to anxiety, oppression, and annoyance?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ye imaṁ pariyāpuṇanti tesaṁ kukkuccaṁ hoti, vihesā hoti, vilekhā hoti, ye imaṁ na pariyāpuṇanti tesaṁ kukkuccaṁ na hoti vihesā na hoti vilekhā na hoti. Anuddiṭṭhaṁ idaṁ varaṁ, anuggahitaṁ idaṁ varaṁ, apariyāpuṭaṁ idaṁ varaṁ, adhāritaṁ idaṁ varaṁ, vinayo vā antaradhāyatu, ime vā bhikkhū appakataññuno hontū”ti upasampannassa vinayaṁ vivaṇṇeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he disparages the Monastic Law to one who is fully ordained, saying, “Those who learn this will be anxious,” “They will feel oppressed,” “They will be annoyed;” “Those who don’t learn this won’t be anxious,” “They won’t feel oppressed,” “They won’t be annoyed;” “It’s better left unrecited,” “It’s better left unlearned,” “It’s better left unstudied,” “It’s better left unmastered;” “May the Monastic Law disappear, or may these monks remain ignorant,” then he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī vinayaṁ vivaṇṇeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he disparages the Monastic Law to one who is fully ordained, and he perceives them as fully ordained, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko vinayaṁ vivaṇṇeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he disparages the Monastic Law to one who is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī vinayaṁ vivaṇṇeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he disparages the Monastic Law to one who is fully ordained, but he does not perceive them as fully ordained, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ dhammaṁ vivaṇṇeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he disparages some other rule, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannassa vinayaṁ vā aññaṁ vā dhammaṁ vivaṇṇeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he disparages the Monastic Law or some other rule to one who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is to one who is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is to one who is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is to one who is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vivaṇṇetukāmo, “iṅgha tvaṁ suttante vā gāthāyo vā abhidhammaṁ vā pariyāpuṇassu, pacchā vinayaṁ pariyāpuṇissasī”ti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, not desiring to disparage, he says, “Listen, learn discourses or verses or philosophy, and later you can learn the Monastic Law;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vilekhanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on annoyance, the second, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
