<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc7_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Musāvādavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">7. Dhammadesanāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">7. The training rule on teaching </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā udāyī sāvatthiyaṁ kulūpako hoti, bahukāni kulāni upasaṅkamati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Udāyī was associating with and visiting a number of families in Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena aññataraṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After robing up one morning, he took his bowl and robe and went to a certain family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena gharaṇī nivesanadvāre nisinnā hoti, gharasuṇhā āvasathadvāre nisinnā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the housewife was sitting at the entrance door and the daughter-in-law at the door to one of the rooms. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī yena gharaṇī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā gharaṇiyā upakaṇṇake dhammaṁ desesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Udāyī went up to the housewife and gave her a teaching, whispering in her ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho gharasuṇhāya etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the daughter-in-law thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ nu kho so samaṇo sassuyā jāro udāhu obhāsatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is this monastic my mother-in-law’s lover, or is he speaking indecently?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī gharaṇiyā upakaṇṇake dhammaṁ desetvā yena gharasuṇhā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā gharasuṇhāya upakaṇṇake dhammaṁ desesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After teaching the housewife in this way, Udāyī went up to the daughter-in-law and gave her a teaching in the same way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho gharaṇiyā etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the housewife thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ nu kho so samaṇo gharasuṇhāya jāro udāhu obhāsatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is this monastic my daughter-in-law’s lover, or is he speaking indecently?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā udāyī gharasuṇhāya upakaṇṇake dhammaṁ desetvā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When Udāyī had left, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho gharaṇī gharasuṇhaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the housewife said to her daughter-in-law, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“he je, kiṁ te eso samaṇo avocā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Hey, what did that monastic say to you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dhammaṁ me, ayye, desesi”.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“He gave me a teaching, madam. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ayyāya pana kiṁ avocā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">But what did he say to you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayhampi dhammaṁ desesī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“He gave me a teaching, too.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyo udāyī upakaṇṇake dhammaṁ desessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Udāyī give teachings by whispering in the ear? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nanu nāma vissaṭṭhena vivaṭena dhammo desetabbo”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should not teachings be given audibly and openly?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tāsaṁ itthīnaṁ ujjhāyantīnaṁ khiyyantīnaṁ vipācentīnaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those women, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized Udāyī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā udāyī mātugāmassa dhammaṁ desessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Udāyī give teachings to women?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ udāyiṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Udāyī: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, udāyi, mātugāmassa dhammaṁ desesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Udāyī, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, mātugāmassa dhammaṁ desessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu mātugāmassa dhammaṁ deseyya pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk gives a teaching to a woman, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena upāsikā bhikkhū passitvā etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards some female lay followers saw some monks and said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“iṅghāyyā, dhammaṁ desethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, please give a teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na, bhaginī, kappati mātugāmassa dhammaṁ desetun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s not allowable for us to teach women.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Iṅghāyyā, chappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ desetha, sakkā ettakenapi dhammo aññātun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Just teach five or six sentences. That might be enough for us to understand.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na, bhaginī, kappati mātugāmassa dhammaṁ desetun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s not allowable for us to teach women.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kukkuccāyantā na desesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And being afraid of wrongdoing, they did not teach them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsikā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those female lay followers complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma, ayyā, amhehi yācīyamānā dhammaṁ na desessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can they not teach us when asked?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tāsaṁ upāsikānaṁ ujjhāyantīnaṁ khiyyantīnaṁ vipācentīnaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those female lay followers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa chappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ desetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to teach five or six sentences to a woman. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhū mātugāmassa uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ deseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk gives a teaching of more than five or six sentences to a woman, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū—“bhagavatā anuññātaṁ mātugāmassa chappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ desetun”ti te aviññuṁ purisaviggahaṁ upanisīdāpetvā mātugāmassa uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ desenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the monks from the group of six knew that the Buddha had made this allowance, they taught women more than five or six sentences with a man who did not understand sitting nearby. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū aviññuṁ purisaviggahaṁ upanisīdāpetvā mātugāmassa uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ desessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six teach women more than five or six sentences with a man who doesn’t understand sitting nearby?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, aviññuṁ purisaviggahaṁ upanisīdāpetvā mātugāmassa uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ desethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, aviññuṁ purisaviggahaṁ upanisīdāpetvā mātugāmassa uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ desessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu mātugāmassa uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ deseyya, aññatra viññunā purisaviggahena, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk gives a teaching of more than five or six sentences to a woman, except in the presence of a man who understands, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">…The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussitthī; na yakkhī na petī na tiracchānagatā; viññū, paṭibalā subhāsitadubbhāsitaṁ duṭṭhullāduṭṭhullaṁ ājānituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human female, not a female spirit, not a female ghost, not a female animal; one who understands and is capable of discerning bad speech and good speech, what is indecent and what is decent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttarichappañcavācāhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">More than five or six sentences: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atirekachappañcavācāhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in excess of five or six sentences. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A teaching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddhabhāsito, sāvakabhāsito, isibhāsito, devatābhāsito, atthūpasañhito, dhammūpasañhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what has been spoken by the Buddha, what has been spoken by disciples, what has been spoken by sages, what has been spoken by gods, what is connected with what is beneficial, what is connected with the Teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Deseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padena deseti, pade pade āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he teaches by the line, then for every line he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkharāya deseti, akkharakkharāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he teaches by the syllable, then for every syllable he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra viññunā purisaviggahenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except in the presence of a man who understands: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā viññuṁ purisaviggahaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless a man who understands is present. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññū nāma purisaviggaho,</span></p>
<p class="p3">A man who understands: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭibalo hoti subhāsitadubbhāsitaṁ duṭṭhullāduṭṭhullaṁ ājānituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who is capable of discerning bad speech and good speech, what is indecent and what is decent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme mātugāmasaññī uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ deseti, aññatra viññunā purisaviggahena, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, and he perceives her as such, and he teaches her more than five or six sentences, except in the presence of a man who understands, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme vematiko uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ deseti, aññatra viññunā purisaviggahena, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, but he is unsure of it, and he teaches her more than five or six sentences, except in the presence of a man who understands, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme amātugāmasaññī uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ deseti, aññatra viññunā purisaviggahena, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, but he does not perceive her as such, and he teaches her more than five or six sentences, except in the presence of a man who understands, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yakkhiyā vā petiyā vā paṇḍakassa vā tiracchānagatamanussaviggahitthiyā vā uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ deseti, aññatra viññunā purisaviggahena, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he teaches more than five or six sentences to a female spirit, a female ghost, a _paṇḍaka_, or a female animal in the form of a woman, except in the presence of a man who understands, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme mātugāmasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme amātugāmasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, and he does not perceive them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññunā purisaviggahena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a man who understands is present; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ deseti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he teaches five or six sentences; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakachappañcavācāhi dhammaṁ deseti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he teaches less than five or six sentences; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uṭṭhahitvā puna nisīditvā deseti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets up, sits down again, and then teaches; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātugāmo uṭṭhahitvā puna nisīdati tasmiṁ deseti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the woman gets up and sits down again, and he then teaches her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassa mātugāmassa deseti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he teaches another woman; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañhaṁ pucchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks a question; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañhaṁ puṭṭho katheti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is asked a question and then speaks; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya bhaṇantaṁ mātugāmo suṇāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is speaking for the benefit of someone else and a woman listens in; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammadesanāsikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on teaching, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
