<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc44_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on naked ascetics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">44. Rahopaṭicchannasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">44. The training rule on private and concealed </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto sahāyakassa gharaṁ gantvā tassa pajāpatiyā saddhiṁ raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Upananda the Sakyan went to the house of a friend and sat down with his wife in private on a concealed seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The husband complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyo upanando mayhaṁ pajāpatiyā saddhiṁ raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Upananda sit with my wife in private on a concealed seat?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa purisassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto mātugāmena saddhiṁ raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Upananda sit in private on a concealed seat with a woman?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, mātugāmena saddhiṁ raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, mātugāmena saddhiṁ raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu mātugāmena saddhiṁ raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk sits down in private on a concealed seat with a woman, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussitthī, na yakkhī na petī na tiracchānagatā, antamaso tadahujātāpi dārikā, pageva mahattarī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human female, not a female spirit, not a female ghost, not a female animal; even a girl born on that very day, let alone an older one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Raho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">In private: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkhussa raho sotassa raho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is private to the eye and there is private to the ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkhussa raho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Private to the eye: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti akkhiṁ vā nikhaṇīyamāne bhamukaṁ vā ukkhipīyamāne sīsaṁ vā ukkhipīyamāne passituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one is unable to see them winking, raising an eyebrow, or nodding. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sotassa raho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Private to the ear: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti pakatikathā sotuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one is unable to hear ordinary speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭicchannaṁ nāma āsanaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">A concealed seat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuṭṭena vā kavāṭena vā kilañjena vā sāṇipākārena vā rukkhena vā thambhena vā kotthaḷiyā vā, yena kenaci paṭicchannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is concealed by a wall, a screen, a door, a cloth screen, a tree, a pillar, a grain container, or anything else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajjaṁ kappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sits down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātugāme nisinne bhikkhu upanisinno vā hoti upanipanno vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monk sits down or lies down next to the seated woman, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu nisinne mātugāmo upanisinno vā hoti upanipanno vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the woman sits down or lies down next to the seated monk, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho vā nisinnā honti ubho vā nipannā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If both are seated or both are lying down, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme mātugāmasaññī raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, and he perceives her as such, and he sits down in private on a concealed seat with her, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme vematiko raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, but he is unsure of it, and he sits down in private on a concealed seat with her, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme amātugāmasaññī raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, but he does not perceive her as such, and he sits down in private on a concealed seat with her, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yakkhiyā vā petiyā vā paṇḍakena vā tiracchānagatāya vā manussaviggahitthiyā vā saddhiṁ raho paṭicchanne āsane nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he sits down in private on a concealed seat with a female spirit, a female ghost, a _paṇḍaka_, or a female animal in form of a woman, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme mātugāmasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme amātugāmasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, and he does not perceive them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci viññū puriso dutiyo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has a male companion who understands; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiṭṭhati na nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stands and does not sit down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">arahopekkho,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not seeking privacy; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññavihito nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sits down preoccupied with something else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rahopaṭicchannasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on private and concealed, the fourth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
