<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc48_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on naked ascetics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">48. Uyyuttasenāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">48. The training rule on armies </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rājā pasenadi kosalo senāya abbhuyyāto hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">King Pasenadi of Kosala was marching out with the army, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū uyyuttaṁ senaṁ dassanāya agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks from the group of six went to see it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasā kho rājā pasenadi kosalo chabbaggiye bhikkhū dūratova āgacchante.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When King Pasenadi saw the monks coming, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna pakkosāpetvā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he summoned them and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tumhe, bhante, āgatatthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, why have you come here?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mahārājānaṁ mayaṁ daṭṭhukāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We wish to see the great king.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ, bhante, maṁ diṭṭhena yuddhābhinandinaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s the use of seeing me finding pleasure in battle? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nanu bhagavā passitabbo”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Shouldn’t you see the Buddha?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And people complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā uyyuttaṁ senaṁ dassanāya āgacchissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics go to see the army? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākampi alābhā, amhākampi dulladdhaṁ, ye mayaṁ ājīvassa hetu puttadārassa kāraṇā senāya āgacchāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s our misfortune that we must go out with the army for the sake of our livelihood and because of our wives and children.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū uyyuttaṁ senaṁ dassanāya gacchissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six go to see the army?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, uyyuttaṁ senaṁ dassanāya gacchathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, uyyuttaṁ senaṁ dassanāya gacchissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu uyyuttaṁ senaṁ dassanāya gaccheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk goes to see an army, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno mātulo senāya gilāno hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a certain monk had a sick uncle in the army. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa bhikkhuno santike dūtaṁ pāhesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The uncle sent a message to that monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahañhi senāya gilāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m with the army and I’m sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āgacchatu bhadanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please come, Venerable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Icchāmi bhadantassa āgatan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I want you to come.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tassa bhikkhuno etadahosi—“bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ—‘na uyyuttaṁ senaṁ dassanāya gantabban’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Knowing that the Buddha had laid down a rule against going to see an army, that monk thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayañca me mātulo senāya gilāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have a sick uncle in the army. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ nu kho mayā paṭipajjitabban”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What should I do now?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, tathārūpappaccayā senāya gantuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to go to the army when there’s a suitable reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu uyyuttaṁ senaṁ dassanāya gaccheyya, aññatra tathārūpappaccayā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk goes to see an army, except if there is a suitable reason, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyuttā nāma senā</span></p>
<p class="p3">An army: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gāmato nikkhamitvā niviṭṭhā vā hoti payātā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it has left the inhabited area and is either encamped or marching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Senā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An army: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">hatthī assā rathā pattī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">elephants, horses, chariots, infantry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvādasapuriso hatthī, tipuriso asso, catupuriso ratho, cattāro purisā sarahatthā patti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An elephant has twelve men; a horse has three men; a chariot has four men; an infantry unit has four men with arrows in hand. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanāya gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is on his way to see it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhito passati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever he stands to see it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vijahitvā punappunaṁ passati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Every time he moves outside the range of sight and then sees it again, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra tathārūpappaccayāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except if there is a suitable reason: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā tathārūpappaccayaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless there is a suitable reason. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyutte uyyuttasaññī dassanāya gacchati, aññatra tathārūpappaccayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an army, and he perceives it as such, and he goes to see it, except if there is a suitable reason, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyutte vematiko dassanāya gacchati, aññatra tathārūpappaccayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an army, but he is unsure of it, and he goes to see it, except if there is a suitable reason, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyutte anuyyuttasaññī dassanāya gacchati, aññatra tathārūpappaccayā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an army, but he does not perceive it as such, and he goes to see it, except if there is a suitable reason, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamekaṁ dassanāya gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is on his way to see one division of a fourfold army, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhito passati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever he stands to see it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dassanūpacāraṁ vijahitvā punappunaṁ passati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Every time he moves outside the range of sight and then sees it again, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyyutte uyyuttasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not an army, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyyutte vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not an army, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuyyutte anuyyuttasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not an army, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāme ṭhito passati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sees it while standing in a monastery; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhussa ṭhitokāsaṁ vā nisinnokāsaṁ vā nipannokāsaṁ vā āgacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the army comes to where the monk is standing, sitting, or lying down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭipathaṁ gacchanto passati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he sees it while walking in the opposite direction; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathārūpappaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has a suitable reason; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uyyuttasenāsikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on armies, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
