<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc88_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ratanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on precious things </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">88. Tūlonaddhasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">88. The training rule on upholstered with cotton down </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū mañcampi pīṭhampi tūlonaddhaṁ kārāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six had beds and benches made upholstered with cotton down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā vihāracārikaṁ āhiṇḍantā passitvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people walking about the dwellings saw this, they complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā mañcampi pīṭhampi tūlonaddhaṁ kārāpessanti, seyyathāpi gihī kāmabhogino”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics have beds and benches made upholstered with cotton down? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū mañcampi pīṭhampi tūlonaddhaṁ kārāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six do this?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, mañcampi pīṭhampi tūlonaddhaṁ kārāpethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, mañcampi pīṭhampi tūlonaddhaṁ kārāpessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu mañcaṁ vā pīṭhaṁ vā tūlonaddhaṁ kārāpeyya, uddālanakaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has a bed or a bench made upholstered with cotton down, it is to be stripped, and he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mañco nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A bed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāro mañcā— masārako, bundikābaddho, kuḷīrapādako, āhaccapādako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of beds: one with legs and frame, called _masāraka_; one with legs and frame, called _bundikābaddha_; one with crooked legs; one with detachable legs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pīṭhaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A bench: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri pīṭhāni— masārakaṁ, bundikābaddhaṁ, kuḷīrapādakaṁ, āhaccapādakaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of benches: one with legs and frame, called _masāraka_; one with legs and frame, called _bundikābaddha_; one with crooked legs; one with detachable legs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tūlaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cotton down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tīṇi tūlāni— rukkhatūlaṁ, latātūlaṁ, poṭakitūlaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are three kinds of cotton down: cotton down from trees, cotton down from creepers, cotton down from grass. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has made: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karoti vā kārāpeti vā, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes one or has one made, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena uddāletvā pācittiyaṁ desetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets it, it is to be stripped, and he is then to confess an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes himself what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññassatthāya karoti vā kārāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes one or has one made for the benefit of someone else, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gets one that was made by someone else and then uses it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyoge,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a back-and-knee strap; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyabandhane,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a belt; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṁsabaddhake,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a shoulder strap; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pattatthavikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a bowl bag; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parissāvane,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a water filter; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bibbohanaṁ karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is making a pillow; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā uddāletvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets one made by another and then strips it before using it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tūlonaddhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on upholstered with cotton down, the sixth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
