<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc39_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on eating </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">39. Paṇītabhojanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">39. The training rule on fine foods </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six ate fine foods that they had requested for themselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics eat fine foods that they have requested for themselves? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassa sampannaṁ na manāpaṁ, kassa sāduṁ na ruccatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who doesn’t like nice food? Who doesn’t prefer tasty food?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six eat fine foods that they have requested for themselves?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kho pana tāni paṇītabhojanāni, seyyathidaṁ— sappi navanītaṁ telaṁ madhu phāṇitaṁ maccho maṁsaṁ khīraṁ dadhi. Yo pana bhikkhu evarūpāni paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk asks for any of these kinds of fine foods for himself—that is, ghee, butter, oil, honey, syrup, fish, meat, milk, and curd—and then eats it, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū gilānā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a number of monks were sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānapucchakā bhikkhū gilāne bhikkhū etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks who were looking after them asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccāvuso, khamanīyaṁ, kacci yāpanīyan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you’re bearing up? I hope you’re getting better?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbe mayaṁ, āvuso, paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjāma, tena no phāsu hoti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Previously we ate fine foods that we had requested ourselves, and then we were comfortable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idāni pana ‘bhagavatā paṭikkhittan’ti kukkuccāyantā na viññāpema, tena no na phāsu hotī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But now that the Buddha has prohibited this, we don’t request because we’re afraid of wrongdoing. And because of that we’re not comfortable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānena bhikkhunā paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a sick monk to eat fine foods that he has requested for himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yāni kho pana tāni paṇītabhojanāni, seyyathidaṁ— sappi navanītaṁ telaṁ madhu phāṇitaṁ maccho maṁsaṁ khīraṁ dadhi. Yo pana bhikkhu evarūpāni paṇītabhojanāni agilāno attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who is not sick asks for any of these kinds of fine foods for himself—that is, ghee, butter, oil, honey, syrup, fish, meat, milk, and curd—and then eats it, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kho pana tāni paṇītabhojanānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">These kinds of fine foods: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappi nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Ghee: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gosappi vā ajikāsappi vā mahiṁsasappi vā, yesaṁ maṁsaṁ kappati tesaṁ sappi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">ghee from cows, ghee from goats, ghee from buffaloes, or ghee from whatever animal whose meat is allowable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navanītaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Butter: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaññeva navanītaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">butter from those same animals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Telaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Oil: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tilatelaṁ sāsapatelaṁ madhukatelaṁ eraṇḍatelaṁ vasātelaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">sesame oil, mustard-seed oil, honey-tree oil, castor oil, oil from fat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Madhu nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Honey: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkhikāmadhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">honey from bees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phāṇitaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Syrup: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ucchumhā nibbattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from sugarcane. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maccho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">udako vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what lives in water is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maṁsaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Meat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yesaṁ maṁsaṁ kappati, tesaṁ maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the meat of those animals whose meat is allowable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Milk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gokhīraṁ vā ajikākhīraṁ vā mahiṁsakhīraṁ vā, yesaṁ maṁsaṁ kappati, tesaṁ khīraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">milk from cows, milk from goats, milk from buffaloes, or milk from whatever animal whose meat is allowable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhi nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Curd: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaññeva dadhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">curd from those same animals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evarūpāni paṇītabhojanānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any of these kinds of fine foods: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathārūpāni paṇītabhojanāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">such kinds of fine foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is not sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa vinā paṇītabhojanāni phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is comfortable without fine foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa vinā paṇītabhojanāni na phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is not comfortable without fine foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno attano atthāya viññāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick and he requests for himself, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena “bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he receives it with the intention of eating it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno agilānasaññī paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick, and he does not perceive himself as sick, and he eats fine foods that he has requested for himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno vematiko paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick, but he is unsure of it, and he eats fine foods that he has requested for himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno gilānasaññī paṇītabhojanāni attano atthāya viññāpetvā bhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick, but he perceives himself as sick, and he eats fine foods that he has requested for himself, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno agilānasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is sick, but he does not perceive himself as sick, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is sick, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno gilānasaññī anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is sick, and he perceives himself as sick, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilāno hutvā viññāpetvā agilāno bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asked for it when he was sick, but eats it when he is no longer sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa sesakaṁ bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats the leftovers from one who is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of his own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṇītabhojanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on fine foods, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
