<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc70_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">70. Kaṇṭakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">70. The training rule on Kaṇṭaka </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena kaṇṭakassa nāma samaṇuddesassa evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the novice monastic Kaṇṭaka had the following bad and erroneous view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As I understand the teachings of the Buddha, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho sambahulā bhikkhū kaṇṭakassa nāma kira samaṇuddesassa evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A number of monks heard that the novice monastic Kaṇṭaka had that view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā, te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū yena kaṇṭako samaṇuddeso tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā kaṇṭakaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They went to see him and asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira te, āvuso kaṇṭaka, evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Kaṇṭaka, that you have such a view?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ byā kho ahaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi— ‘yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes, indeed. As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mā, āvuso kaṇṭaka, evaṁ avaca. Mā bhagavantaṁ abbhācikkhi. Na hi sādhu bhagavato abbhakkhānaṁ. Na hi bhagavā evaṁ vadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, Kaṇṭaka, don’t misrepresent the Buddha, for it’s not good to misrepresent him. The Buddha would never say such a thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anekapariyāyenāvuso kaṇṭaka, antarāyikā dhammā antarāyikā vuttā bhagavatā. Alañca pana te paṭisevato antarāyāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has given many discourses about the obstructive things being obstructive and how they obstruct one who indulges in them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appassādā kāmā vuttā bhagavatā bahudukkhā bahupāyāsā, ādīnavo ettha bhiyyo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha has said that there’s little enjoyment in worldly pleasures, but much suffering and much trouble, and that the danger in them is greater. … ” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi kho kaṇṭako samaṇuddeso tehi bhikkhūhi vuccamāno tatheva taṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ thāmasā parāmāsā abhinivissa voharati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But even though the monks corrected Kaṇṭaka like this, he stubbornly held on to that bad and erroneous view, and he continued to insist on it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“evaṁ byā kho ahaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi— ‘yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yato ca kho te bhikkhū nāsakkhiṁsu kaṇṭakaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ etasmā pāpakā diṭṭhigatā vivecetuṁ, atha kho te bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Since those monks were unable to make him give up that view, they went to the Buddha and told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā kaṇṭakaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned the Kaṇṭaka: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira te, kaṇṭaka, evarūpaṁ pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ uppannaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Kaṇṭaka, that you have such a view?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evaṁ byā kho ahaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi— ‘yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes indeed, Venerable Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kassa nu kho nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, mayā evaṁ dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāsi?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, who do you think I have taught like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nanu mayā, moghapurisa, anekapariyāyena antarāyikā dhammā antarāyikā vuttā, alañca pana te paṭisevato antarāyāya?</span></p>
<p class="p3">Haven’t I given many discourses about the obstructive things being obstructive and how they obstruct one who indulges in them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appassādā kāmā vuttā mayā bahudukkhā bahupāyāsā, ādīnavo ettha bhiyyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I have said that there is little enjoyment in worldly pleasures, but much suffering and much trouble, and that the danger in them is greater. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhikaṅkalūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I have said that worldly pleasures are similar to a skeleton … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappasirūpamā kāmā vuttā mayā bahudukkhā bahupāyāsā, ādīnavo ettha bhiyyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">similar to a snake’s head; they are much suffering and much trouble, and the danger in them is greater. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ca pana tvaṁ, moghapurisa, attanā duggahitena amhe ceva abbhācikkhasi attānañca khaṇasi bahuñca apuññaṁ pasavasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And yet, foolish man, by misunderstanding you have misrepresented me, hurt yourself, and made much demerit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañhi te, moghapurisa, bhavissati dīgharattaṁ ahitāya dukkhāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will be for your long-lasting harm and suffering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pasannānañca ekaccānaṁ aññathattāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and cause some to lose it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahitvā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Having rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tena hi, bhikkhave, saṅgho kaṇṭakaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ nāsetu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, monks, the Sangha should expel the novice monastic Kaṇṭaka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nāsetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And this is how he should be expelled: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ajjatagge te, āvuso kaṇṭaka, na ceva so bhagavā satthā apadisitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘From today, Kaṇṭaka, you may not refer to the Buddha as your teacher. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi caññe samaṇuddesā labhanti bhikkhūhi saddhiṁ dirattatirattaṁ sahaseyyaṁ sāpi te natthi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And you can no longer share a sleeping place with the monks for two or three nights, as can other novices. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cara pire vinassā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Go! Away with you!’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho saṅgho kaṇṭakaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ nāsesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha then expelled Kaṇṭaka. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū jānaṁ tathānāsitaṁ kaṇṭakaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ upalāpentipi upaṭṭhāpentipi sambhuñjantipi sahāpi seyyaṁ kappenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the monks from the group of six supported Kaṇṭaka, and they were attended on by him, lived with him, and shared a sleeping place with him. Yet they knew that he had been expelled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū jānaṁ tathānāsitaṁ kaṇṭakaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ upalāpessantipi upaṭṭhāpessantipi sambhuñjissantipi sahāpi seyyaṁ kappessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six support Kaṇṭaka, and be attended on by him, live with him, and share a sleeping place with him, even though they know that he has been expelled?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, jānaṁ tathānāsitaṁ kaṇṭakaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ upalāpethāpi upaṭṭhāpethāpi sambhuñjathāpi sahāpi seyyaṁ kappethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, jānaṁ tathānāsitaṁ kaṇṭakaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ upalāpessathāpi upaṭṭhāpessathāpi sambhuñjissathāpi sahāpi seyyaṁ kappessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Samaṇuddesopi ce evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Also if a novice monastic says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā’ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so samaṇuddeso bhikkhūhi evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">then the monks should correct him like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘māvuso samaṇuddesa, evaṁ avaca, mā bhagavantaṁ abbhācikkhi, na hi sādhu bhagavato abbhakkhānaṁ, na hi bhagavā evaṁ vadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, don’t misrepresent the Buddha, for it’s not good to misrepresent the Buddha. The Buddha would never say such a thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anekapariyāyenāvuso samaṇuddesa, antarāyikā dhammā antarāyikā vuttā bhagavatā. Alañca pana te paṭisevato antarāyāyā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In many discourses the Buddha has declared the obstructive things to be obstructive and how they obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca so samaṇuddeso bhikkhūhi vuccamāno tatheva paggaṇheyya, so samaṇuddeso bhikkhūhi evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that novice monastic continues as before, he should be told: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ajjatagge te, āvuso samaṇuddesa, na ceva so bhagavā satthā apadisitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“From today on you may not refer to the Buddha as your teacher. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi caññe samaṇuddesā labhanti bhikkhūhi saddhiṁ dirattatirattaṁ sahaseyyaṁ sāpi te natthi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And you can no longer share a sleeping place with the monks for two or three nights, as can other novice monastics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cara pire vinassā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Go! Away with you!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ tathānāsitaṁ samaṇuddesaṁ upalāpeyya vā upaṭṭhāpeyya vā sambhuñjeyya vā saha vā seyyaṁ kappeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk supports that novice monastic, or he is attended on by him, lives with him, or shares a sleeping place with him, even though he knows that he has been expelled in this way, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇuddeso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A novice monastic: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇero vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a novice monk is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vadeyyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā, te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So samaṇuddesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo so evaṁvādī samaṇuddeso.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the novice monastic who speaks in that way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññehi bhikkhūhi, ye passanti ye suṇanti tehi vattabbo— “mā, āvuso samaṇuddesa, evaṁ avaca. Mā bhagavantaṁ abbhācikkhi. Na hi sādhu bhagavato abbhakkhānaṁ. Na hi bhagavā evaṁ vadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">other monks, those who see it or hear about it. They should correct him, “No, don’t misrepresent the Buddha, for it’s not good to misrepresent the Buddha. The Buddha would never say such a thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anekapariyāyenāvuso samaṇuddesa, antarāyikā dhammā antarāyikā vuttā bhagavatā. Alañca pana te paṭisevato antarāyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In many discourses the Buddha has declared the obstructive things to be obstructive and how they obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbo …</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct him a second time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi vattabbo …</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct him a third time … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace paṭinissajjati iccetaṁ kusalaṁ, no ce paṭinissajjati so samaṇuddeso bhikkhūhi evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gives up that view, all is well. If he does not, he should be told: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ajjatagge te, āvuso samaṇuddesa, na ceva so bhagavā satthā apadisitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“From today on you may not refer to the Buddha as your teacher. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi caññe samaṇuddesā labhanti bhikkhūhi saddhiṁ dirattatirattaṁ sahaseyyaṁ sāpi te natthi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And you can no longer share a sleeping place with the monks for two or three nights, as can other novice monastics. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cara pire vinassā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Go! Away with you!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti, aññe vā tassa ārocenti, so vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the offending novice monastic has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathānāsitanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Expelled in this way: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evaṁ nāsitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">expelled like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇuddeso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Novice monastic: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇero vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">novice monk is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upalāpeyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Supports: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā uddesaṁ vā paripucchaṁ vā dassāmīti upalāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he supports him, saying, “I’ll give him a bowl,” “I’ll give him a robe,” “I’ll recite to him,” or “I’ll test him,” he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upaṭṭhāpeyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is attended on by: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tassa cuṇṇaṁ vā mattikaṁ vā dantakaṭṭhaṁ vā mukhodakaṁ vā sādiyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he accepts bath powder, soap, a tooth cleaner, or water for rinsing the mouth from him, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sambhuñjeyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lives with: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambhogo nāma dve sambhogā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two types of living together: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmisasambhogo ca dhammasambhogo ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">material living together and spiritual living together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisasambhogo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Material living together: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmisaṁ deti vā paṭiggaṇhāti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives or receives material things, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammasambhogo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Spiritual living together: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddisati vā uddisāpeti vā, padena uddisati vā uddisāpeti vā, pade pade āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he recites or has the other recite. If he recites or has the other recite by the line, then for every line he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkharāya uddisati vā uddisāpeti vā, akkharakkharāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he recites or has the other recite by the syllable, then for every syllable he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saha vā seyyaṁ kappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Shares a sleeping place with: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekacchanne nāsitake samaṇuddese nipanne bhikkhu nipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">under the same ceiling: if the monk lies down when the expelled novice monastic is already lying down, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu nipanne nāsitako samaṇuddeso nipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monk is already lying down when the expelled novice monastic lies down, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho vā nipajjanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they both lie down together, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṭṭhahitvā punappunaṁ nipajjanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">every time they get up and then lie down again, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāsitake nāsitakasaññī upalāpeti vā upaṭṭhāpeti vā sambhuñjati vā saha vā seyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the novice monastic has been expelled, and he perceives him as such, and he supports him or is attended on by him or lives with him or shares a sleeping place with him, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāsitake vematiko upalāpeti vā upaṭṭhāpeti vā sambhuñjati vā saha vā seyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the novice monastic has been expelled, but he is unsure of it, and he supports him or is attended on by him or lives with him or shares a sleeping place with him, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāsitake anāsitakasaññī upalāpeti vā upaṭṭhāpeti vā sambhuñjati vā saha vā seyyaṁ kappeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the novice monastic has been expelled, but he does not perceive him as such, and he supports him or is attended on by him or lives with him or shares a sleeping place with him, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāsitake nāsitakasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the novice monastic has not been expelled, but he perceives him such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāsitake vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the novice monastic has not been expelled, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāsitake anāsitakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the novice monastic has not been expelled, and he does not perceive him as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāsitakoti jānāti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he knows that he has not been expelled; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṁ diṭṭhiṁ paṭinissaṭṭhoti jānāti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he knows that he has given up that view; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kaṇṭakasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on Kaṇṭaka, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavaggo sattamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh sub-chapter on containing living beings is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañciccavadhasappāṇaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Intentionally killing, containing living beings, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkoṭaṁ duṭṭhullachādanaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Agitation, concealing what is grave; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnavīsati satthañca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Less than twenty, and group of travelers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṁvidhānaṁ ariṭṭhakaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Appointment, on Ariṭṭha; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhittaṁ kaṇṭakañceva,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Ejected, and Kaṇṭaka: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasa sikkhāpadā imeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">These ten training rules.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
