<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc54_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surāpānavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on drinking alcohol </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">54. Anādariyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">54. The training rule on disrespect </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā kosambiyaṁ viharati ghositārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā channo anācāraṁ ācarati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Channa was misbehaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks would tell him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māvuso channa, evarūpaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Channa, don’t do that; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ kappatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s not allowable,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So anādariyaṁ paṭicca karotiyeva.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he just did it again out of disrespect. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā channo anādariyaṁ karissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Channa act disrespectfully?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, channa, anādariyaṁ karosī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Channa, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, anādariyaṁ karissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Anādariye pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk is disrespectful, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Disrespectful: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve anādariyāni— puggalānādariyañca dhammānādariyañca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two kinds of disrespect: disrespect for the person and disrespect for the rule. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puggalānādariyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Disrespect for the person: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannena paññattena vuccamāno— “ayaṁ ukkhittako vā vambhito vā garahito vā, imassa vacanaṁ akataṁ bhavissatī”ti anādariyaṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when corrected by one who is fully ordained about a rule that has been laid down, he thinks, “They’ve been ejected,” “They’ve been reproved,” or “They’ve been censured,” and then, “I won’t do what they say,” and he acts disrespectfully, then he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammānādariyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Disrespect for the rule: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannena paññattena vuccamāno— “kathāyaṁ nasseyya vā vinasseyya vā antaradhāyeyya vā”, taṁ vā na sikkhitukāmo anādariyaṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when corrected by one who is fully ordained about a rule that has been laid down, he thinks, “What can be done so that this rule is lost?” “What can be done so that it perishes?”  or “What can be done so that it disappears?” or he does not want to train in that rule, and he acts disrespectfully, then he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī anādariyaṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and he perceives them as such, and he acts disrespectfully, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko anādariyaṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he acts disrespectfully, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī anādariyaṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but he does not perceive them as such, and he acts disrespectfully, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apaññattena vuccamāno—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, when corrected about something that has not been laid down, he thinks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ na sallekhāya na dhutatthāya na pāsādikatāya na apacayāya na vīriyārambhāya saṁvattatī”ti anādariyaṁ karoti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This isn’t conducive to the erasing of defilements,” “This isn’t conducive to ascetic practices,” “This isn’t conducive to being inspiring,” “This isn’t conducive to a reduction in things,” or “This isn’t conducive to being energetic,” and he acts disrespectfully, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannena paññattena vā apaññattena vā vuccamāno—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, when corrected by one who is not fully ordained, whether or not it has been laid down, he thinks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ na sallekhāya na dhutatthāya na pāsādikatāya na apacayāya na vīriyārambhāya saṁvattatī”ti anādariyaṁ karoti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This isn’t conducive to the erasing of defilements,” “This isn’t conducive to ascetic practices,” “This isn’t conducive to being inspiring,” “This isn’t conducive to a reduction in things,” or “This isn’t conducive to being energetic,” and he acts disrespectfully, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“evaṁ amhākaṁ ācariyānaṁ uggaho paripucchā”ti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he says, “This is how we were taught and tested by our teachers;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādariyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on disrespect, the fourth, is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
