<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc78_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahadhammikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on legitimately </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">78. Upassutisikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">78. The training rule on eavesdropping </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū pesalehi bhikkhūhi saddhiṁ bhaṇḍanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six were arguing with the good monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pesalā bhikkhū evaṁ vadanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The good monks said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“alajjino ime, āvuso, chabbaggiyā bhikkhū.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These monks from the group of six are shameless; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sakkā imehi saha bhaṇḍitun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it’s not possible to argue with them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū evaṁ vadanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the monks from the group of six said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tumhe, āvuso, amhe alajjivādena pāpethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why are you slandering us by calling us shameless?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kahaṁ pana tumhe, āvuso, assutthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How did you know?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayaṁ āyasmantānaṁ upassutiṁ tiṭṭhamhā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We were eavesdropping on you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhūnaṁ bhaṇḍanajātānaṁ kalahajātānaṁ vivādāpannānaṁ upassutiṁ tiṭṭhissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six eavesdrop on monks they are arguing and disputing with?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṁ bhaṇḍanajātānaṁ kalahajātānaṁ vivādāpannānaṁ upassutiṁ tiṭṭhathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhūnaṁ bhaṇḍanajātānaṁ kalahajātānaṁ vivādāpannānaṁ upassutiṁ tiṭṭhissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhūnaṁ bhaṇḍanajātānaṁ kalahajātānaṁ vivādāpannānaṁ upassutiṁ tiṭṭheyya—‘yaṁ ime bhaṇissanti taṁ sossāmī’ti etadeva paccayaṁ karitvā anaññaṁ, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eavesdrops on monks who are arguing and disputing, thinking, “I’ll hear what they say,” and he does so only for this reason and no other, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūnanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">On monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññesaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">on other monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaṇḍanajātānaṁ kalahajātānaṁ vivādāpannānanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who are arguing and disputing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhikaraṇajātānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who are engaged in a legal issue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upassutiṁ tiṭṭheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Eavesdrops: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imesaṁ sutvā codessāmi sāressāmi paṭicodessāmi paṭisāressāmi maṅkū karissāmī”ti gacchati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is on his way to eavesdrop, thinking, “After hearing what they say, I’ll accuse them,” “… I’ll remind them,” “… I’ll counter-accuse them,” “… I’ll counter-remind them,” “… I’ll humiliate them,” he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhito suṇāti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever he stands to listen, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchato gacchanto turito gacchati sossāmīti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is walking behind someone, and he speeds up with the intention to eavesdrop, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhito suṇāti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever he stands to listen, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purato gacchanto ohiyyati sossāmīti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is walking in front of someone, and he slows down with the intention to eavesdrop, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yattha ṭhito suṇāti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wherever he stands to eavesdrop, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhussa ṭhitokāsaṁ vā nisinnokāsaṁ vā nipannokāsaṁ vā āgantvā mantentaṁ ukkāsitabbaṁ, vijānāpetabbaṁ, no ce ukkāseyya vā vijānāpeyya vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he goes to where a monk who is speaking privately is standing, seated, or lying down, he should clear his throat or make his presence known. If he does not clear his throat or make his presence known, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etadeva paccayaṁ karitvā anaññanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He does so only for this reason and no other: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na añño koci paccayo hoti upassutiṁ tiṭṭhituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is no other reason for eavesdropping. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññī upassutiṁ tiṭṭhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is fully ordained, and he perceives him as such, and he eavesdrops on him, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematiko upassutiṁ tiṭṭhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he eavesdrops on him, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññī upassutiṁ tiṭṭhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is fully ordained, but he does not perceive him as such, and he eavesdrops on him, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannassa upassutiṁ tiṭṭhati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he eavesdrops on one who is not fully ordained, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is one who is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imesaṁ sutvā oramissāmi viramissāmi vūpasamissāmi attānaṁ parimocessāmī”ti gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes, thinking, “After hearing what they say, I’ll refrain,” “… I’ll abstain,” “… I’ll resolve it,” “… I’ll free myself;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upassutisikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on eavesdropping, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
