<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc40_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on eating </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">40. Dantaponasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">40. The training rule on tooth cleaners </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā vesāliyaṁ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood near Vesālī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sabbapaṁsukūliko susāne viharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a monk who only used discarded things was staying in a charnel ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So manussehi diyyamānaṁ na icchati paṭiggahetuṁ, susānepi rukkhamūlepi ummārepi ayyavosāṭitakāni sāmaṁ gahetvā paribhuñjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He disliked receiving things from people. Instead he would take whatever was offered to the dead at the charnel ground, at the foot of trees, or at the threshold, and he would use that. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayaṁ bhikkhu amhākaṁ ayyavosāṭitakāni sāmaṁ gahetvā paribhuñjissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can this monk take the offerings to our ancestors and use them? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Theroyaṁ bhikkhu vaṭharo manussamaṁsaṁ maññe khādatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This monk is big and strong. One might even suspect him of eating human flesh!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu adinnaṁ mukhadvāraṁ āhāraṁ āharissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can this monk eat food that hasn’t been given?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, adinnaṁ mukhadvāraṁ āhāraṁ āharasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, adinnaṁ mukhadvāraṁ āhāraṁ āharissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu adinnaṁ mukhadvāraṁ āhāraṁ āhareyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats food that has not been given, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū udakadantapone kukkuccāyanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the monks did not use water or tooth cleaners because they were afraid of wrongdoing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, udakadantaponaṁ sāmaṁ gahetvā paribhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to use water and tooth cleaners after taking them yourselves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu adinnaṁ mukhadvāraṁ āhāraṁ āhareyya, aññatra udakadantaponā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats food that has not been given, except for water and tooth cleaners, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">That has not been given: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appaṭiggahitakaṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what has not been received is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dinnaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Given: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena vā kāyapaṭibaddhena vā nissaggiyena vā dente hatthapāse ṭhito kāyena vā kāyapaṭibaddhena vā paṭiggaṇhāti, etaṁ dinnaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">standing within arm’s reach of one giving by body or by what is connected to his body or by releasing, he receives it by body or by what is connected to his body—this is called “given”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">udakadantaponaṁ ṭhapetvā yaṁ kiñci ajjhoharaṇīyaṁ, eso āhāro nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever is edible, apart from water and tooth cleaners—this is called “food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra udakadantaponāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except for water and tooth cleaners: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā udakadantaponaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from water and tooth cleaners. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti gaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes it with the intention of eating it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭiggahitake appaṭiggahitakasaññī adinnaṁ mukhadvāraṁ āhāraṁ āhāreti, aññatra udakadantaponā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been received, and he does not perceive it as such, and he eats it, except for water and tooth cleaners, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭiggahitake vematiko adinnaṁ mukhadvāraṁ āhāraṁ āhāreti, aññatra udakadantaponā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been received, but he is unsure of it, and he eats it, except for water and tooth cleaners, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭiggahitake paṭiggahitakasaññī adinnaṁ mukhadvāraṁ āhāraṁ āhāreti, aññatra udakadantaponā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been not received, but he perceives it as such, and he eats it, except for water and tooth cleaners, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggahitake appaṭiggahitakasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been received, but he does not perceive it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggahitake vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been received, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggahitake paṭiggahitakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been received, and he perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">udakadantapone,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is water or tooth cleaners; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri mahāvikaṭāni sati paccaye asati kappiyakārake sāmaṁ gahetvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when there is a reason, but there is no attendant, he himself takes the four filthy edibles and eats them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dantaponasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on tooth cleaners, the tenth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanavaggo catuttho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth sub-chapter on eating is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassuddānaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the summary: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piṇḍo gaṇaṁ paraṁ pūvaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Alms, group, another, pastry, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve ca vuttā pavāraṇā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And two are spoken on invitations; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikāle sannidhī khīraṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the wrong time, store, milk, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dantaponena te dasāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And with tooth cleaner—those are the ten.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
