<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc61_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">61. Sañciccasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">61. The training rule on intentionally </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā udāyī issāso hoti, kākā cassa amanāpā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Udāyī was skilled in archery. And because he disliked crows, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So kāke vijjhitvā vijjhitvā sīsaṁ chinditvā sūle paṭipāṭiyā ṭhapesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he shot them. He cut off their heads and then set them out in a row impaled on stakes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kenime, āvuso, kākā jīvitā voropitā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who killed these crows?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayā, āvuso.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I did. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amanāpā me kākā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I don’t like crows.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā udāyī sañcicca pāṇaṁ jīvitā voropessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Udāyī intentionally kill living beings?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, udāyi, sañcicca pāṇaṁ jīvitā voropesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Udāyī, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, sañcicca pāṇaṁ jīvitā voropessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu sañcicca pāṇaṁ jīvitā voropeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk intentionally kills a living being, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañciccāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Intentionally: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jānanto sañjānanto cecca abhivitaritvā vītikkamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">knowing, perceiving, having intended, having decided, he transgresses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A living being: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiracchānagatapāṇo vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">an animal is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jīvitā voropeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Kills: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jīvitindriyaṁ upacchindati uparodheti santatiṁ vikopeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he cuts off and makes an end of the life faculty, if he destroys its continuity, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇe pāṇasaññī jīvitā voropeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a living being, and he perceives it as such, and he kills it, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇe vematiko jīvitā voropeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a living being, but he is unsure of it, and he kills it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇe appāṇasaññī jīvitā voropeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a living being, but he does not perceive it as such, and he kills it, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appāṇe pāṇasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a living being, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appāṇe vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a living being, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appāṇe appāṇasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a living being, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">namaraṇādhippāyassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not aiming at death; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañciccasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on intentionally, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
