<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc11_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">11. Bhūtagāmasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">11. The training rule on plants </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā āḷaviyaṁ viharati aggāḷave cetiye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Āḷavī at the Aggāḷava Shrine, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āḷavakā bhikkhū navakammaṁ karontā rukkhaṁ chindantipi chedāpentipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks there were doing building work. They were cutting down trees and having them cut down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataropi āḷavako bhikkhu rukkhaṁ chindati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, when a certain monk was cutting down a tree, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṁ rukkhe adhivatthā devatā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the deity that lived in it said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mā, bhante, attano bhavanaṁ kattukāmo mayhaṁ bhavanaṁ chindī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, don’t cut down our dwelling because you want to build a dwelling for yourself.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu anādiyanto chindiyeva, tassā ca devatāya dārakassa bāhuṁ ākoṭesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not taking any heed, he just cut it down, and he hurt the arm of that deity’s child. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tassā devatāya etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The deity thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yannūnāhaṁ imaṁ bhikkhuṁ idheva jīvitā voropeyyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why don’t I just kill this monk?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tassā devatāya etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But then it reconsidered, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kho metaṁ patirūpaṁ yāhaṁ imaṁ bhikkhuṁ idheva jīvitā voropeyyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It wouldn’t be right to just kill this monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yannūnāhaṁ bhagavato etamatthaṁ āroceyyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Let me instead tell the Buddha about this matter.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā devatā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And it approached the Buddha and told him what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sādhu sādhu, devate.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well done, deity! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sādhu kho tvaṁ, devate, taṁ bhikkhuṁ jīvitā na voropesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s good that you didn’t kill that monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacajja tvaṁ, devate, taṁ bhikkhuṁ jīvitā voropeyyāsi, bahuñca tvaṁ, devate, apuññaṁ pasaveyyāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If you had killed that monk, you would have made much demerit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaccha tvaṁ, devate, amukasmiṁ okāse rukkho vivitto tasmiṁ upagacchā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tree over there is empty. Take that as your dwelling.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā rukkhaṁ chindissantipi chedāpessantipi ekindriyaṁ samaṇā sakyaputtiyā jīvaṁ viheṭhentī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics cut down trees and have them cut down? They are hurting life with one sense.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āḷavakā bhikkhū rukkhaṁ chindissantipi chedāpessantipī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those monks at Āḷavī cut down trees and have them cut down?”… </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, rukkhaṁ chindathāpi chedāpethāpī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, rukkhaṁ chindissathāpi, chedāpessathāpi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jīvasaññino hi, moghapurisā, manussā rukkhasmiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">People regard trees as conscious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtagāmapātabyatāya pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk destroys plants, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Plants: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bījajātāni— mūlabījaṁ, khandhabījaṁ, phaḷubījaṁ, aggabījaṁ, bījabījameva pañcamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of propagation: propagation from roots, propagation from stems, propagation from joints, propagation from cuttings, propagation from seeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mūlabījaṁ nāma—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Propagation from roots: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">haliddi, siṅgiveraṁ, vacā, vacattaṁ, ativisā, kaṭukarohiṇī, usīraṁ, bhaddamuttakaṁ, yāni vā panaññānipi atthi mūle jāyanti, mūle sañjāyanti, etaṁ mūlabījaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">turmeric, ginger, sweet flag, white sweet flag, atis root, black hellebore, khus root, nutgrass, or any other plant produced from roots, that grows from roots—this is called “propagation from roots”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khandhabījaṁ nāma—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Propagation from stems: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assattho, nigrodho, pilakkho, udumbaro, kacchako, kapitthano, yāni vā panaññānipi atthi khandhe jāyanti, khandhe sañjāyanti, etaṁ khandhabījaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Bodhi tree, the banyan tree, the Indian rock fig, the cluster fig, the Indian cedar, the portia tree, or any other plant produced from stems, that grows from stems—this is called “propagation from stems”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phaḷubījaṁ nāma—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Propagation from joints: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ucchu, veḷu, naḷo, yāni vā panaññānipi atthi pabbe jāyanti, pabbe sañjāyanti, etaṁ phaḷubījaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">sugarcane, bamboo, reed, or any other plant produced from joints, that grows from joints—this is called “propagation from joints”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggabījaṁ nāma—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Propagation from cuttings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjukaṁ, phaṇijjakaṁ, hiriveraṁ, yāni vā panaññānipi atthi agge jāyanti, agge sañjāyanti, etaṁ aggabījaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">shrubby basil, rajmahal hemp, Vicks plant, or any other plant produced from cuttings, that grows from cuttings—this is called “propagation from cuttings”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bījabījaṁ nāma—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Propagation from seeds: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbaṇṇaṁ, aparaṇṇaṁ, yāni vā panaññānipi atthi bīje jāyanti, bīje sañjāyanti, etaṁ bījabījaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">grains, vegetables, or any other plant produced from seeds, that grows from seeds—this is called “propagation from seeds”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bīje bījasaññī chindati vā chedāpeti vā, bhindati vā bhedāpeti vā, pacati vā pacāpeti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is capable of propagation, and he perceives that it is, and he cuts it down or has it cut down, or he breaks it or has it broken, or he cooks it or has it cooked, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bīje vematiko chindati vā chedāpeti vā, bhindati vā bhedāpeti vā, pacati vā pacāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is capable of propagation, but he is unsure of it, and  he cuts it down or has it cut down, or he breaks it or has it broken, or he cooks it or has it cooked, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bīje abījasaññī chindati vā chedāpeti vā, bhindati vā bhedāpeti vā, pacati vā pacāpeti vā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is capable of propagation, but he perceives that it is not, and he cuts it down or has it cut down, or he breaks it or has it broken, or he cooks it or has it cooked, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abīje bījasaññī āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not capable of propagation, but he perceives that it is, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abīje vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not capable of propagation, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abīje abījasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not capable of propagation, and he perceives that it is not, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ jāna, imaṁ dehi, imaṁ āhara, iminā attho, imaṁ kappiyaṁ karohī”ti bhaṇati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he says, “Consider this”, “Give this”, “Bring this”, “There’s need for this”, “Make this allowable;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtagāmasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on plants, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
