<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc31_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on eating </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">31. Āvasathapiṇḍasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">31. The training rule on alms-meals at public guesthouses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyā avidūre aññatarassa pūgassa āvasathapiṇḍo paññatto hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain association was preparing an alms-meal at a public guesthouse not far from Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṁ piṇḍāya pavisitvā piṇḍaṁ alabhamānā āvasathaṁ agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after robing up in the morning, the monks from the group of six took their bowl and robe and entered Sāvatthī for alms. Not getting anything, they went to that public guesthouse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā—“cirassampi bhadantā āgatā”ti sakkaccaṁ parivisiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because it was long since they had been there, people served them respectfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū dutiyampi divasaṁ …pe… tatiyampi divasaṁ pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṁ piṇḍāya pavisitvā piṇḍaṁ alabhamānā āvasathaṁ gantvā bhuñjiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second and a third day those monks did the same thing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then they thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ mayaṁ karissāma ārāmaṁ gantvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s the point of returning to the monastery? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hiyyopi idheva āgantabbaṁ bhavissatī”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Tomorrow we’ll just have to come back here.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattheva anuvasitvā anuvasitvā āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So they stayed on and on right there, eating alms at the guesthouse, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Titthiyā apasakkanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">while the monastics of other religions left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā anuvasitvā anuvasitvā āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics stay on and on, eating alms at the guesthouse? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nayimesaññeva āvasathapiṇḍo paññatto;</span></p>
<p class="p3">We don’t prepare the alms-food just for them; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbesaññeva āvasathapiṇḍo paññatto”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">we prepare it for everyone.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū anuvasitvā anuvasitvā āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six stay on and on, eating alms at a public guesthouse?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, anuvasitvā anuvasitvā āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjathā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, anuvasitvā anuvasitvā āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjissatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eko āvasathapiṇḍo bhuñjitabbo. Tato ce uttari bhuñjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats more than one alms-meal at a public guesthouse, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā sāriputto kosalesu janapade sāvatthiṁ gacchanto yena aññataro āvasatho tenupasaṅkami.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards Venerable Sāriputta was traveling through the Kosalan country on his way to Sāvatthī when he came to a public guesthouse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā—“cirassampi thero āgato”ti sakkaccaṁ parivisiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because it was long since he had been there, people served him respectfully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmato sāriputtassa bhuttāvissa kharo ābādho uppajji, nāsakkhi tamhā āvasathā pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After he had eaten, Sāriputta became severely ill, and he was unable to leave that guesthouse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te manussā dutiyampi divasaṁ āyasmantaṁ sāriputtaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">On the second day, too, those people said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhuñjatha, bhante”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please eat, Venerable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But since he knew that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ anuvasitvā anuvasitvā āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjitun”ti kukkuccāyanto na paṭiggahesi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Buddha had prohibited eating alms at a public guesthouse after staying on and on, and because he was afraid of wrongdoing, he did not accept. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chinnabhatto ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a consequence, he missed his meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he arrived at Sāvatthī, he told the monks what had happened, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they in turn told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānena bhikkhunā anuvasitvā anuvasitvā āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a sick monk to stay on at a public guesthouse and eat alms there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Agilānena bhikkhunā eko āvasathapiṇḍo bhuñjitabbo. Tato ce uttari bhuñjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who is not sick eats more than one alms-meal at a public guesthouse, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is not sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkoti tamhā āvasathā pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is able to leave that public guesthouse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkoti tamhā āvasathā pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is unable to leave that public guesthouse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āvasathapiṇḍo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Alms-meal at a public guesthouse: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññataraṁ bhojanaṁ— sālāya vā maṇḍape vā rukkhamūle vā ajjhokāse vā anodissa yāvadattho paññatto hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">as much as one needs of any of the five cooked foods, prepared for the general public, in a building, under a roof-cover, at the foot of a tree, or out in the open. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānena bhikkhunā sakiṁ bhuñjitabbo. Tato ce uttari “bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk who is not sick may eat there once. If he receives food beyond that with the intention of eating it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno agilānasaññī tatuttari āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick, and he perceives himself as not sick, and he eats more than one alms-meal at a public guesthouse, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno vematiko tatuttari āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick, but he is unsure of it, and he eats more than one alms-meal at a public guesthouse, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilāno gilānasaññī tatuttari āvasathapiṇḍaṁ bhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not sick, but he perceives himself as sick, and he eats more than one alms-meal at a public guesthouse, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno agilānasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is sick, but he perceives himself as not sick, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno vematiko āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is sick, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilāno gilānasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is sick, and he perceives himself as sick, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">agilāno sakiṁ bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not sick and he eats once; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gacchanto, vā āgacchanto vā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats while coming or going; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmikā nimantetvā bhojenti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he eats after being invited by the owners; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">odissa paññatto hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the food is prepared specifically for him; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na yāvadattho paññatto hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is not as much as he needs; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni ṭhapetvā sabbattha anāpatti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is anything apart from the five cooked foods; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āvasathapiṇḍasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on alms-meals at public guesthouses, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
