<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc43_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Acelakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on naked ascetics </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">43. Sabhojanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">43. The training rule on lustful </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto sahāyakassa gharaṁ gantvā tassa pajāpatiyā saddhiṁ sayanighare nisajjaṁ kappesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Upananda the Sakyan went to the house of a friend and sat down with his wife in their bedroom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso yenāyasmā upanando sakyaputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The husband approached Upananda, bowed, and sat down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so puriso pajāpatiṁ etadavoca—“dadehāyyassa bhikkhan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then said to his wife, “Please give him alms.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī āyasmato upanandassa sakyaputtassa bhikkhaṁ adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she did so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—“gacchatha, bhante, yato ayyassa bhikkhā dinnā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards he said, “Please leave, Sir, the alms have been given.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī sallakkhetvā—“pariyuṭṭhito ayaṁ puriso”ti, āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—“nisīdatha, bhante, mā agamitthā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the woman, knowing that her husband was lustful, said, “Please sit, Sir, don’t go.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho so puriso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time and </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho so puriso āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—“gacchatha, bhante, yato ayyassa bhikkhā dinnā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a third time he repeated his request, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho sā itthī āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—“nisīdatha, bhante, mā agamitthā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and both times his wife repeated hers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso nikkhamitvā bhikkhū ujjhāpesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then left the house and complained to the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ, bhante, ayyo upanando mayhaṁ pajāpatiyā saddhiṁ sayanighare nisinno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, Venerable Upananda is seated with my wife in our bedroom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So mayā uyyojīyamāno na icchati gantuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When I ask him to leave because we’re busy, he doesn’t want to go.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahukiccā mayaṁ bahukaraṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized Upananda, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto sabhojane kule anupakhajja nisajjaṁ kappessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Upananda sit down intruding on a lustful couple?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, sabhojane kule anupakhajja nisajjaṁ kappesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, sabhojane kule anupakhajja nisajjaṁ kappessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu sabhojane kule anupakhajja nisajjaṁ kappeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk sits down intruding on a lustful couple, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabhojanaṁ nāma kulaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lustful couple: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthī ceva hoti puriso ca, itthī ca puriso ca ubho anikkhantā honti, ubho avītarāgā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">both a woman and a man are present. The woman and the man have not both left, and both are not without lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupakhajjāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Intruding on: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anupavisitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">enters after. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nisajjaṁ kappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sits down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahallake ghare piṭṭhasaṅghāṭassa hatthapāsaṁ vijahitvā nisīdati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in a large house, if he sits down more than one arm’s reach inside the door frame, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khuddake ghare piṭṭhivaṁsaṁ atikkamitvā nisīdati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In a small house, if he sits down beyond the ridge beam, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sayanighare sayanigharasaññī sabhojane kule anupakhajja nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a bedroom, and he perceives it as such, and he sits down intruding on a lustful couple, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sayanighare vematiko sabhojane kule anupakhajja nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a bedroom, but he is unsure of it, and he sits down intruding on a lustful couple, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sayanighare nasayanigharasaññī sabhojane kule anupakhajja nisajjaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a bedroom, but he does not perceive it as such, and he sits down intruding on a lustful couple, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nasayanighare sayanigharasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a bedroom, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nasayanighare vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a bedroom, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nasayanighare nasayanigharasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a bedroom, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahallake ghare piṭṭhasaṅghāṭassa hatthapāsaṁ avijahitvā nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, in a large house, he sits down, but not more one arm’s reach inside the door frame; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khuddake ghare piṭṭhivaṁsaṁ anatikkamitvā nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, in a small house, he sits down, but not beyond the ridge beam; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhu dutiyo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has a companion monk; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho nikkhantā honti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if both have left; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho vītarāgā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if both are without lust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nasayanighare,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is not a bedroom; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabhojanasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on lustful, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
