<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc69_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">69. Ukkhittasambhogasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">69. The training rule on living with one who has been ejected </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū jānaṁ tathāvādinā ariṭṭhena bhikkhunā akaṭānudhammena taṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissaṭṭhena saddhiṁ sambhuñjantipi saṁvasantipi sahāpi seyyaṁ kappenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six lived with the monk Ariṭṭha, and they did formal meetings and shared a sleeping place with him. Yet they knew that he was saying such things, that he had not made amends according to the rule, and that he had not given up that view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū jānaṁ tathāvādinā ariṭṭhena bhikkhunā akaṭānudhammena taṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissaṭṭhena saddhiṁ sambhuñjissantipi saṁvasissantipi sahāpi seyyaṁ kappessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six live, do formal meetings, and share a sleeping place with the monk Ariṭṭha, even though they know that he’s saying such things, that he hasn’t made amends according to the rule, and that he hasn’t given up that view?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, jānaṁ tathāvādinā ariṭṭhena bhikkhunā akaṭānudhammena taṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissaṭṭhena saddhiṁ sambhuñjathāpi saṁvasathāpi sahāpi seyyaṁ kappethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, jānaṁ tathāvādinā ariṭṭhena bhikkhunā akaṭānudhammena taṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissaṭṭhena saddhiṁ sambhuñjissathāpi saṁvasissathāpi sahāpi seyyaṁ kappessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jānaṁ tathāvādinā bhikkhunā akaṭānudhammena taṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissaṭṭhena saddhiṁ sambhuñjeyya vā saṁvaseyya vā saha vā seyyaṁ kappeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk lives, does formal meetings, or shares a sleeping place with a monk who he knows is saying such things, who has not made amends according to the rule, and who has not given up that view, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jānāti nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">He knows: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṁ vā jānāti, aññe vā tassa ārocenti, so vā āroceti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he knows by himself or others have told him or the offender has told him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathāvādināti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is saying such things: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tathāhaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmi, yathā yeme antarāyikā dhammā vuttā bhagavatā, te paṭisevato nālaṁ antarāyāyā”ti evaṁ vādinā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who says this: “As I understand the Buddha’s Teaching, the things he calls obstructive are unable to obstruct one who indulges in them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akaṭānudhammo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has not made amends according to the rule: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkhitto anosārito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has been ejected and not reinstated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissaṭṭhena saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With a monk who has not given up that view: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">etaṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissaṭṭhena saddhiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">with a monk who has not given up this view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sambhuñjeyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lives with: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambhogo nāma dve sambhogā— āmisasambhogo ca dhammasambhogo ca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two types of living together: material living together and spiritual living together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmisasambhogo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Material living together: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āmisaṁ deti vā paṭiggaṇhāti vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gives or receives material things, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammasambhogo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Spiritual living together: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddisati vā uddisāpeti vā, padena uddisati vā uddisāpeti vā, pade pade āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he recites or has the other recite. If he recites or has the other recite by the line, then for every line he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkharāya uddisati vā uddisāpeti vā, akkharakkharāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he recites or has the other recite by the syllable, then for every syllable he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvaseyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Does formal meetings with: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkhittakena saddhiṁ uposathaṁ vā pavāraṇaṁ vā saṅghakammaṁ vā karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does the observance-day procedure, the invitation procedure, or a legal procedure with one who has been ejected, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saha vā seyyaṁ kappeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Shares a sleeping place with: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekacchanne ukkhittake nipanne bhikkhu nipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">under the same ceiling: if the monk lies down when the one who has been ejected is already lying down, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu nipanne ukkhittako nipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monk is already lying down when the one who has been ejected lies down, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubho vā nipajjanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they both lie down together, he commits an offense entailing confession; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṭṭhahitvā punappunaṁ nipajjanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">every time they get up and then lie down again, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhittake ukkhittakasaññī sambhuñjati vā saṁvasati vā saha vā seyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has been ejected, and he perceives him as such, and he lives or does formal meetings or shares a sleeping place with him, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhittake vematiko sambhuñjati vā saṁvasati vā saha vā seyyaṁ kappeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has been ejected, but he is unsure of it, and he lives or does formal meetings or shares a sleeping place with him, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhittake anukkhittakasaññī sambhuñjati vā saṁvasati vā saha vā seyyaṁ kappeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has been ejected, but he does not perceive him as such, and he lives or does formal meetings or shares a sleeping place with him, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anukkhittake ukkhittakasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has not been ejected, but he perceives him as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anukkhittake vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has not been ejected, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anukkhittake anukkhittakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other monk has not been ejected, and he does not perceive him as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anukkhittoti jānāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he knows that he has not been ejected; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkhitto osāritoti jānāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he knows that he has been reinstated after being ejected; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṁ diṭṭhiṁ paṭinissaṭṭhoti jānāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he knows that he has given up that view; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhittasambhogasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on living with one who has been ejected, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
