<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc67_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappāṇakavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on containing living beings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">67. Saṁvidhānasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">67. The training rule on appointments </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu kosalesu janapade sāvatthiṁ gacchanto aññatarena gāmadvārena atikkamati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk who was traveling through the Kosalan country on his way to Sāvatthī walked through the gateway of a certain village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatarā itthī sāmikena saha bhaṇḍitvā gāmato nikkhamitvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ passitvā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman who had had an argument with her husband walked through the same gateway. When she saw that monk, she asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kahaṁ, bhante, ayyo gamissatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, where are you going?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sāvatthiṁ kho ahaṁ, bhagini, gamissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m going to Sāvatthī.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Ahaṁ ayyena saddhiṁ gamissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“May I go with you?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Eyyāsi, bhaginī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sure.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tassā itthiyā sāmiko gāmato nikkhamitvā manusse pucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards that woman’s husband also left that village. He asked around, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“apāyyo, evarūpiṁ itthiṁ passeyyāthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Have you seen such-and-such a woman?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Esāyyo, pabbajitena saha gacchatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“She’s walking along with a monastic.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso anubandhitvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ gahetvā ākoṭetvā muñci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then followed after them, caught that monk, and gave him a beating. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu aññatarasmiṁ rukkhamūle padhūpento nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk sat down fuming at the foot of a tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī taṁ purisaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the woman said to her husband, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nāyyo, so bhikkhu maṁ nippātesi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“This monk didn’t make me go; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">api ca ahameva tena bhikkhunā saddhiṁ gacchāmi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">I was the one who went with him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akārako so bhikkhu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s innocent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gaccha, naṁ khamāpehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Go and ask his forgiveness.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso taṁ bhikkhuṁ khamāpesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he did so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk then went to Sāvatthī, where he told the monks what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu mātugāmena saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a monk travel by appointment with a woman?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, mātugāmena saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, mātugāmena saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ, uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu mātugāmena saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjeyya, antamaso gāmantarampi, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk travels by appointment with a woman, even just to the next village, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāmo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A woman: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussitthī, na yakkhī na petī na tiracchānagatā viññū paṭibalā subhāsitadubbhāsitaṁ duṭṭhullāduṭṭhullaṁ ājānituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human female, not a female spirit, not a female ghost, not a female animal. She understands and is capable of discerning bad speech and good speech, what is indecent and what is decent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saddhinti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">together. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidhāyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">By appointment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gacchāma bhagini, gacchāmāyya, gacchāmāyya, gacchāma bhagini, ajja vā hiyyo vā pare vā gacchāmā”ti saṁvidahati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes an appointment like this: he says, “Let’s go,” and she replies, “Yes, let’s go, Venerable;” or she says, “Let’s go, Venerable,” and he replies, “Yes, let’s go;” or he says, “Let’s go today,” “Let’s go tomorrow,” or “Let’s go the day after tomorrow,” then he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antamaso gāmantarampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even just to the next village: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kukkuṭasampāte gāme gāmantare gāmantare āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the villages are a chicken’s flight apart, then for every next village he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agāmake araññe addhayojane addhayojane āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When it is an uninhabited area, a wilderness, then for every six kilometers he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme mātugāmasaññī saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, and he perceives her as such, and he travels by appointment with her, even just to the next village, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme vematiko saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, but he is unsure of it, and he travels by appointment with her, even just to the next village, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātugāme amātugāmasaññī saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a woman, but he does not perceive her as such, and he travels by appointment with her, even just to the next village, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu saṁvidahati mātugāmo na saṁvidahati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the monk makes an appointment, but the woman does not express her agreement, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yakkhiyā vā petiyā paṇḍakena vā tiracchānagatamanussaviggahitthiyā vā saddhiṁ saṁvidhāya ekaddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjati, antamaso gāmantarampi, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he travels by appointment with a female spirit, with a female ghost, with a _paṇḍaka_, with a female animal in the form of a woman, even just to the next village, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme mātugāmasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amātugāme amātugāmasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a woman, and he does not perceive them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asaṁvidahitvā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes, but not by appointment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātugāmo saṁvidahati bhikkhu na saṁvidahati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the woman has made an appointment, but he has not expressed his agreement; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">visaṅketena gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he goes, but not according to the appointment; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṁvidhānasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on appointments, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
