<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pc38_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on eating </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">38. Sannidhikārakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">38. The training rule on storing </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato ānandassa upajjhāyo āyasmā belaṭṭhasīso araññe viharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Belaṭṭhasīsa, Venerable Ānanda’s preceptor, was staying in the wilderness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So piṇḍāya caritvā sukkhakuraṁ ārāmaṁ haritvā sukkhāpetvā nikkhipati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After walking for alms, he brought plain boiled rice back to the monastery, where he dried and stored it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadā āhārena attho hoti, tadā udakena temetvā temetvā bhuñjati, cirena gāmaṁ piṇḍāya pavisati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whenever he got hungry, he moistened and ate it. As a result, he only went the village for alms after a long time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ belaṭṭhasīsaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks asked him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, āvuso, cirena gāmaṁ piṇḍāya pavisasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why do you only go for alms after such a long time?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā belaṭṭhasīso bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he told them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ pana tvaṁ, āvuso, sannidhikārakaṁ bhojanaṁ bhuñjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But do you eat food that you’ve stored?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā belaṭṭhasīso sannidhikārakaṁ bhojanaṁ bhuñjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Belaṭṭhasīsa eat food that he has stored?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, belaṭṭhasīsa, sannidhikārakaṁ bhojanaṁ bhuñjasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Belaṭṭhasīsa, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, belaṭṭhasīsa, sannidhikārakaṁ bhojanaṁ bhuñjissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Belaṭṭhasīsa, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, belaṭṭhasīsa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu sannidhikārakaṁ khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk eats fresh or cooked food that he has stored, he commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannidhikārakaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">That he has stored: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajja paṭiggahitaṁ aparajju khāditaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">received today and eaten on the following day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, the post-midday tonics, the seven-day tonics, and the lifetime tonics—the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives fresh or cooked food with the intention of eating it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannidhikārake sannidhikārakasaññī khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been stored, and he perceives that it has, and he eats the fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannidhikārake vematiko khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been stored, but he is unsure of it, and he eats the fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannidhikārake asannidhikārakasaññī khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been stored, but he does not perceive that it has, and he eats the fresh or cooked food, he commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ āhāratthāya paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics for the purpose of food, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asannidhikārake sannidhikārakasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been stored, but he perceives that it has, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asannidhikārake vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been stored, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asannidhikārake asannidhikārakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been stored, and he does not perceive that it has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvakālikaṁ yāvakāle nidahitvā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he both stores and eats it during the right time; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāmakālikaṁ yāme nidahitvā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he both stores and eats post-midday tonics during the remainder of the day; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattāhakālikaṁ sattāhaṁ nidahitvā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he both stores and eats seven-day tonics during the seven-day period; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvajīvikaṁ sati paccaye paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he uses lifetime tonics when there is a reason; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannidhikārakasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on storing, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
