<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-pd2_root-pli-ms.j. Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2. Dutiyapāṭidesanīyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">2. The second training rule on acknowledgment </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū kulesu nimantitā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time, when families invited monks to meals, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ vosāsantiyo ṭhitā honti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nuns from the group of six were directing people toward the monks from the group of six, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idha sūpaṁ detha, idha odanaṁ dethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Give curry here; give rice here.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhū yāvadatthaṁ bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six ate as much as they wanted, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññe bhikkhū na cittarūpaṁ bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but not so the other monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo vosāsantiyo na nivāressantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six not restrain the nuns from giving directions?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo vosāsantiyo na nivārethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you didn’t do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, bhikkhuniyo vosāsantiyo na nivāressatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you not do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhū paneva kulesu nimantitā bhuñjanti, tatra ce sā bhikkhunī vosāsamānarūpā ṭhitā hoti—‘idha sūpaṁ detha, idha odanaṁ dethā’ti, tehi bhikkhūhi sā bhikkhunī apasādetabbā— ‘apasakka tāva, bhagini, yāva bhikkhū bhuñjantī’ti. Ekassa cepi bhikkhuno na paṭibhāseyya taṁ bhikkhuniṁ apasādetuṁ— ‘apasakka tāva, bhagini, yāva bhikkhū bhuñjantī’ti paṭidesetabbaṁ tehi bhikkhūhi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When monks eat at invitations to families, if a nun is there giving directions, saying, “Give bean curry here; give rice here,” then those monks should stop her: “Stop, Sister, while the monks are eating.” If not even a single monk addresses that nun in this way to stop her, they must acknowledge it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gārayhaṁ, āvuso, dhammaṁ āpajjimhā asappāyaṁ pāṭidesanīyaṁ, taṁ paṭidesemā’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We have done a blameworthy and unsuitable thing which is to be acknowledged. We acknowledge it.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū paneva kulesu nimantitā bhuñjantīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">When monks eat at invitations to families: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kulaṁ nāma cattāri kulāni— khattiyakulaṁ, brāhmaṇakulaṁ, vessakulaṁ, suddakulaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a family: there are four kinds of families: the aristocratic family, the brahmin family, the merchant family, the worker family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantitā bhuñjantīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Eat at invitations: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññatarena bhojanena nimantitā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">eat any of the five cooked foods at invitations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatosaṅghe upasampannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has been given the full ordination by both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vosāsantī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Giving directions: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yathāmittatā yathāsandiṭṭhatā yathāsambhattatā yathāsamānupajjhāyakatā yathāsamānācariyakatā— “idha sūpaṁ detha, idha odanaṁ dethā”ti. Esā vosāsantī nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">saying, “Give bean curry here; give rice here,” according to friendship, according to companionship, according to who one is devoted to, according to being a co-student, according to being a co-pupil—this is called “giving directions”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tehi bhikkhūhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhuñjamānehi bhikkhūhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks who are eating. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā sā vosāsantī bhikkhunī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nun who is giving directions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tehi bhikkhūhi sā bhikkhunī apasādetabbā— “apasakka tāva, bhagini, yāva bhikkhū bhuñjantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those monks should stop her: ‘Stop, Sister, while the monks are eating’: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekassa cepi bhikkhuno anapasādito— “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is not stopped by even one monk, and a monk then receives food with the intention of eating it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññī vosāsantiyā na nivāreti, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is fully ordained, and he perceives her as such, and he does not restrain her from giving directions, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematiko vosāsantiyā na nivāreti, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, and he does not restrain her from giving directions, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññī vosāsantiyā na nivāreti, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is fully ordained, but he does not perceive her as such, and he does not restrain her from giving directions, he commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoupasampannāya vosāsantiyā na nivāreti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not restrain a nun who is fully ordained only on one side from giving directions, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is not fully ordained, but he perceives them as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is not fully ordained, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is not fully ordained, and he does not perceive them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano bhattaṁ dāpeti na deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a nun has someone else give her own food, but she does not give it herself; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññesaṁ bhattaṁ deti na dāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a nun gives someone else’s food, but she does not have anyone give it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ na dinnaṁ taṁ dāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a nun has someone give what has not yet been given; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yattha na dinnaṁ tattha dāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a nun has someone give to someone who has not yet received anything; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sabbesaṁ samakaṁ dāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a nun has someone give equally to all; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sikkhamānā vosāsati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a trainee nun is giving directions; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇerī vosāsati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if a novice nun is giving directions; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni ṭhapetvā sabbattha, anāpatti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is anything apart from the five kinds of cooked food; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyapāṭidesanīyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule on acknowledgment is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
