<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk28_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khambhakatavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on arms akimbo </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">28. Pattasaññīpaṭiggahaṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">28. The training rule on receiving with attention on the almsbowl </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū tahaṁ tahaṁ olokentā piṇḍapātaṁ paṭiggaṇhanti, ākirantepi atikkantepi na jānanti …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six were receiving almsfood while looking here and there, and they did not know whether people were still giving or whether they had received too much. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pattasaññī piṇḍapātaṁ paṭiggahessāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘I will receive almsfood with attention on the almsbowl,’ this is how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattasaññinā piṇḍapāto paṭiggahetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Almsfood is to be received with attention on the bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca tahaṁ tahaṁ olokento piṇḍapātaṁ paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk, out of disrespect, receives almsfood while looking here and there, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
