<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk20_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujjagghikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on laughing loudly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">20. Dutiyasīsappacālakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">20. The second training rule on swaying the head </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sīsappacālakaṁ antaraghare nisīdanti sīsaṁ olambentā …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six were swaying and hanging their heads while sitting in inhabited areas. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na sīsappacālakaṁ antaraghare nisīdissāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘I will not sway my head while sitting in inhabited areas,’ this is how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sīsappacālakaṁ antaraghare nisīditabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should not sway one’s head while sitting in an inhabited area; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīsaṁ paggahetvā nisīditabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one should sit keeping one’s head straight. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca sīsappacālakaṁ antaraghare nisīdati sīsaṁ olambento, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk, out of disrespect, sways and hangs his head while sitting in an inhabited area, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsūpagatassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has entered his dwelling; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tenth training rule is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujjagghikavaggo dutiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second sub-chapter on laughing loudly is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
