<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk18_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujjagghikavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on laughing loudly </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">18. Dutiyabāhuppacālakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">18. The second training rule on swinging the arms </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū bāhuppacālakaṁ antaraghare nisīdanti bāhuṁ olambentā …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six were swinging and dangling their arms while sitting in inhabited areas. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na bāhuppacālakaṁ antaraghare nisīdissāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“‘I will not swing my arms while sitting in inhabited areas,’ this is how you should train.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na bāhuppacālakaṁ antaraghare nisīditabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should not swing one’s arms while sitting in an inhabited area; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bāhuṁ paggahetvā nisīditabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one should sit keeping one’s arms steady. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca bāhuppacālakaṁ antaraghare nisīdati bāhuṁ olambento, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk, out of disrespect, swings and dangles his arms while sitting in an inhabited area, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assatiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is not mindful; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajānantassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he does not know; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsūpagatassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has entered his dwelling; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
