<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk51_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surusuruvagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on slurping </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">51. Surusurukārakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">51. The training rule on slurping </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā kosambiyaṁ viharati ghositārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarena brāhmaṇena saṅghassa payopānaṁ paṭiyattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a brahmin had prepared a milk drink for the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū surusurukārakaṁ khīraṁ pivanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks drank the milk making a slurping sound. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro naṭapubbako bhikkhu evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk who was previously an entertainer made a joke of it, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sabboyaṁ maññe saṅgho sītīkato”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s as if the whole sangha is cooled.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu saṅghaṁ ārabbha davaṁ karissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a monk joke about the Sangha?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, saṅghaṁ ārabbha davaṁ akāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, saṅghaṁ ārabbha davaṁ karissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vigarahitvā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and after rebuking him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na, bhikkhave, buddhaṁ vā dhammaṁ vā saṅghaṁ vā ārabbha davo kātabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, you should not joke about the Buddha, the Teaching, or the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo kareyya, āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If you do, you commit an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā taṁ bhikkhuṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā dubbharatāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking that monk in many ways, the Buddha spoke in dispraise of being difficult to support … the Buddha said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na surusurukārakaṁ bhuñjissāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘“I will not slurp while eating,” this is how you should train.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na surusurukārakaṁ bhuñjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should not slurp while eating. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca surusurukārakaṁ bhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk, out of disrespect, slurps while eating, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
