<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-sk69_root-pli-ms.j. Sekhiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on training </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pādukavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on shoes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">69. Nīcāsanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">69. The training rule on low seats </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa dhammaṁ desenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six were sitting on low seats while giving teachings to people sitting on high seats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa dhammaṁ desessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six sit on low seats while giving teachings to people sitting on high seats?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa dhammaṁ desethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa dhammaṁ desessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vigarahitvā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">and after rebuking them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṁ, bhikkhave, bārāṇasiyaṁ aññatarassa chapakassa pajāpati gabbhinī ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time in Bārāṇasī, monks, there was a low-caste man whose wife became pregnant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, sā chapakī taṁ chapakaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gabbhinīmhi, ayyaputta.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’m pregnant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Icchāmi ambaṁ khāditun’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I crave mangoes.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Natthi ambaṁ, akālo ambassā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘But there are no mangoes. It’s the wrong season.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sace na labhissāmi marissāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If I don’t get any, I’ll die.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena rañño ambo dhuvaphalo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the king had a mango tree that was always bearing fruit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, so chapako yena so ambo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ ambaṁ abhiruhitvā nilīno acchi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that low-caste man went to that mango tree, climbed it, and hid himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, rājā purohitena brāhmaṇena saddhiṁ yena so ambo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ucce āsane nisīditvā mantaṁ pariyāpuṇāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the king and his brahmin counselor went to that same mango tree. There the king sat on a high seat while learning the Vedas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, tassa chapakassa etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The low-caste man thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘yāva adhammiko ayaṁ rājā, yatra hi nāma ucce āsane nisīditvā mantaṁ pariyāpuṇissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘How wrong-headed this king is, in that he sits on a high seat while learning the Vedas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayañca brāhmaṇo adhammiko, yatra hi nāma nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa mantaṁ vācessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the brahmin is wrong-headed too, in that he sits on a low seat while teaching the Vedas to one sitting on a high seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañcamhi adhammiko, yohaṁ itthiyā kāraṇā rañño ambaṁ avaharāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And I’m wrong-headed too, in that I steal mangoes from the king because of a woman. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbamidaṁ carimaṁ katan’ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is all so low!’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattheva paripati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he fell out of the tree right there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Ubho atthaṁ na jānanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Neither understands what is good, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubho dhammaṁ na passare;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Neither sees the Truth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo cāyaṁ mantaṁ vāceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not he who teaches the Vedas, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo cādhammenadhīyati’.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor he who learns improperly.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Sālīnaṁ odano bhutto,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I’ve eaten the finest rice, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sucimaṁsūpasecano;</span></p>
<p class="p3">With a curry of pure meat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmā dhamme na vattāmi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Therefore I’m not practicing the Teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammo ariyebhi vaṇṇito’.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Teaching praised by the Noble Ones.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Dhiratthu taṁ dhanalābhaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘A curse it is the obtaining of wealth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yasalābhañca brāhmaṇa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the obtaining of fame, too, brahmin; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā vutti vinipātena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">These things come with a low rebirth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adhammacaraṇena vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Or with wrong-headed behavior. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribbaja mahābrahme,</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Go forth, great brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pacantaññepi pāṇino;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other beings will do the cooking; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā tvaṁ adhammo ācarito,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t go against the Teaching, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asmā kumbhamivābhidā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because you’ll break like a jar.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadāpi me, bhikkhave, amanāpā nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa mantaṁ vācetuṁ, kimaṅgaṁ pana etarahi na amanāpā bhavissati nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa dhammaṁ desetuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Even at that time, monks, I was displeased by someone teaching the Vedas while sitting on a low seat to someone sitting on a high seat. How, then, could it not be displeasing now? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa agilānassa dhammaṁ desessāmīti sikkhā karaṇīyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘“I will not give a teaching while sitting on a low seat to anyone sitting on a high seat who is not sick,” this is how you should train.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa agilānassa dhammo desetabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">One should not give a teaching while sitting on a low seat to anyone sitting on a high seat who is not sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo anādariyaṁ paṭicca nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa agilānassa dhammaṁ deseti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk, out of disrespect, gives a teaching while sitting on a low seat to someone sitting on a high seat who is not sick, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asañcicca …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is unintentional; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ninth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
