<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pārājikakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing expulsion </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pj7_root-pli-ms.j. Pārājikakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing expulsion </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">7. Ukkhittānuvattikāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">7. The training rule on taking sides with one who has been ejected </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ ariṭṭhaṁ bhikkhuṁ gaddhabādhipubbaṁ anuvattati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nun Thullanandā was taking sides with the monk Ariṭṭha, an ex-vulture-killer, who had been ejected by a unanimous Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ ariṭṭhaṁ bhikkhuṁ gaddhabādhipubbaṁ anuvattissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Thullanandā take sides with the monk Ariṭṭha who has been ejected by a unanimous Sangha?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ ariṭṭhaṁ bhikkhuṁ gaddhabādhipubbaṁ anuvattatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā is doing this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ ariṭṭhaṁ bhikkhuṁ gaddhabādhipubbaṁ anuvattissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nun Thullanandā take sides with the monk Ariṭṭha who has been ejected by a unanimous Sangha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ bhikkhuṁ dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anādaraṁ appaṭikāraṁ akatasahāyaṁ tamanuvatteyya, sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi evamassa vacanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun takes sides with a monk who has been ejected by a unanimous Sangha—in accordance with the rule, the Monastic Law, and the Teacher’s instruction—and who is disrespectful, who has not made amends, and who has not made friends, the nuns should correct her like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘eso kho, ayye, bhikkhu samaggena saṅghena ukkhitto dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anādaro appaṭikāro akatasahāyo, māyye, etaṁ bhikkhuṁ anuvattī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, this monk has been ejected by a unanimous Sangha in accordance with the rule, the Monastic Law, and the Teacher’s instruction. He’s disrespectful, hasn’t made amends, and hasn’t made friends. Venerable, don’t take sides with this monk.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi vuccamānā tatheva paggaṇheyya, sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsitabbā tassa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that nun continues as before, the nuns should press her up to three times to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyañce samanubhāsiyamānā taṁ paṭinissajjeyya, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she then stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce paṭinissajjeyya, ayampi pārājikā hoti asaṁvāsā ukkhittānuvattikā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, she too is expelled and excluded from the community. The training rule on taking sides with one who has been ejected.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaggo nāma saṅgho</span></p>
<p class="p3">A unanimous Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samānasaṁvāsako samānasīmāyaṁ ṭhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">those belonging to the same Buddhist sect and staying within the same monastic boundary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhitto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has been ejected: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpattiyā adassane vā appaṭikamme vā appaṭinissagge vā ukkhitto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has been ejected for not recognizing an offense, for not making amends, or for not giving up a bad view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammena vinayenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">in accordance with the rule, the Monastic Law: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena dhammena yena vinayena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in accordance with that rule, in accordance with that Monastic Law. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthusāsanenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">In accordance with the Teacher’s instruction: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jinasāsanena buddhasāsanena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in accordance with the Conqueror’s instruction, in accordance with the Buddha’s instruction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādaro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is disrespectful: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghaṁ vā gaṇaṁ vā puggalaṁ vā kammaṁ vā nādiyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he does not heed the Sangha, groups of monks, individual monks, or legal procedures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaṭikāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has not made amends: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ukkhitto anosārito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he has been ejected and not reinstated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akatasahāyo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has not made friends: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samānasaṁvāsakā bhikkhū vuccanti sahāyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">monks belonging to the same Buddhist sect is what is meant by “friends”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi saddhiṁ natthi, tena vuccati akatasahāyoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is not together with them—therefore it is called “who has not made friends”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tamanuvatteyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Takes sides with: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁdiṭṭhiko so hoti yaṅkhantiko yaṁruciko, sāpi taṁdiṭṭhikā hoti taṅkhantikā taṁrucikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has the same view, the same belief, the same persuasion as he does. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā sā ukkhittānuvattikā bhikkhunī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that nun who supports one who has been ejected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāhi bhikkhunīhi. Yā passanti yā suṇanti tāhi vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other nuns who see it or hear about it. They should correct her like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“eso kho, ayye, bhikkhu samaggena saṅghena ukkhitto dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anādaro appaṭikāro akatasahāyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, this monk has been ejected by a unanimous Sangha in accordance with the rule, the Monastic Law, and the Teacher’s instruction. He’s disrespectful, hasn’t made amends, and hasn’t made friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māyye, etaṁ bhikkhuṁ anuvattī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable, don’t take sides with this monk.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct her a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvā na vadanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If those who heard about it do not say anything, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī saṅghamajjhampi ākaḍḍhitvā vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun, even if she has to be pulled into the middle of the Sangha, should be corrected like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“eso kho, ayye, bhikkhu samaggena saṅghena ukkhitto dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anādaro appaṭikāro akatasahāyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, this monk has been ejected by a unanimous Sangha in accordance with the rule, the Monastic Law, and the Teacher’s instruction. He’s disrespectful, hasn’t made amends, and hasn’t made friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Māyye, etaṁ bhikkhuṁ anuvattīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable, don’t take sides with this monk.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They should correct her a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should press her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, she should be pressed like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable nun should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā bhikkhunī samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ bhikkhuṁ dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anādaraṁ appaṭikāraṁ akatasahāyaṁ tamanuvattati, sā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun so-and-so is taking sides with a monk who has been ejected by a unanimous Sangha—in accordance with the rule, the Monastic Law, and the Teacher’s instruction—and who is disrespectful, who has not made amends, and who has not made friends. And she keeps on doing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuniṁ samanubhāseyya tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should press her to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā bhikkhunī samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ bhikkhuṁ dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anādaraṁ appaṭikāraṁ akatasahāyaṁ tamanuvattati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun so-and-so is taking sides with a monk who has been ejected by a unanimous Sangha—in accordance with the rule, the Monastic Law, and the Teacher’s instruction—and who is disrespectful, who has not made amends, and who has not made friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she keeps on doing it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuniṁ samanubhāsati tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha presses her to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassā ayyāya khamati itthannāmāya bhikkhuniyā samanubhāsanā tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya, sā tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who approves of pressing her to make her stop should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā nakkhamati, sā bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the second time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the third time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanubhaṭṭhā saṅghena itthannāmā bhikkhunī tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has pressed nun so-and-so to stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammavācā pariyosāne āpatti pārājikassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, she commits an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">She too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimāyo upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offenses entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikā hotīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is expelled: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">seyyathāpi nāma puthusilā dvedhā bhinnā appaṭisandhikā hoti, evameva bhikkhunī yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsanāya na paṭinissajjantī assamaṇī hoti asakyadhītā. Tena vuccati pārājikā hotīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">just as an ordinary stone that has broken in half cannot be put together again, so is a nun who does not stop when pressed three times not a monastic, not a daughter of the Sakyan. Therefore it is said “she is expelled”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asaṁvāsāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Excluded from the community: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṁvāso nāma ekakammaṁ ekuddeso samasikkhatā. Eso saṁvāso nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Community: joint legal procedures, a joint recitation, the same training—this is called “community”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tāya saddhiṁ natthi. Tena vuccati asaṁvāsāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She does not take part in this—therefore it is called “excluded from the community”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti pārājikassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, but she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematikā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti pārājikassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti pārājikassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as illegitimate, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as legitimate, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asamanubhāsantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has not been pressed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭinissajjantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she stops; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya …pe…,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"/></p>
<p class="p3">if she is deranged; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"/></p>
<p class="p3">if she is overwhelmed by pain; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyapārājikaṁ samattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh offense entailing expulsion is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
