<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-ss13_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesā 13: Dutiyapāpasamācārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">13. The second training rule on bad behavior </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī saṅghena samanubhaṭṭhā bhikkhuniyo evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā had been pressed by the Sangha. She then said to the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha. Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But, Venerables, you should socialize. Don’t live separately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo evācārā evaṁsaddā evaṁsilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā. Tā saṅgho na kiñci āha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are other nuns in the Sangha who have such behavior, reputation, and notoriety,  and who harass the Sangha of nuns and hide each other’s offenses. The Sangha says nothing to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhaññeva saṅgho uññāya paribhavena akkhantiyā vebhassiyā dubbalyā evamāha— ‘bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā. Viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of disrespect, contempt, impatience, and slander, and because you are weak that the Sangha says to you, ‘Sisters, you socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. Be secluded, Venerables. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā saṅghena samanubhaṭṭhā bhikkhuniyo evaṁ vakkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā, after being pressed by the Sangha, say this to the nuns?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha. Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetīti” …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī saṅghena samanubhaṭṭhā bhikkhuniyo evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that after being pressed by the Sangha, the nun Thullanandā said this to the nuns?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha. Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo evācārā evaṁsaddā evaṁsilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā. Tā saṅgho na kiñci āha.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhaññeva saṅgho uññāya paribhavena akkhantiyā vebhassiyā dubbalyā evamāha— bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā. Viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī saṅghena samanubhaṭṭhā bhikkhuniyo evaṁ vakkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā, after being pressed by the Sangha, say this to the nuns? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha. Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī evaṁ vadeyya—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha. Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, you should socialize. Don’t live separately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo evācārā evaṁsaddā evaṁsilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā. Tā saṅgho na kiñci āha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are other nuns in the Sangha who have such behavior, reputation, and notoriety, and who harass the Sangha of nuns and hide each other’s offenses. The Sangha says nothing to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhaññeva saṅgho uññāya paribhavena akkhantiyā vebhassiyā dubbalyā evamāha— bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā. Viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of disrespect, contempt, impatience, and slander, and because you are weak that the Sangha says to you, ‘Sisters, you socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. Be secluded, Venerables. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters,’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi evamassa vacanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">then the nuns should correct her like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘mā, ayye, evaṁ avaca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, don’t say such things: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha. Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, you should socialize. Don’t live separately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo evācārā evaṁsaddā evaṁsilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā. Tā saṅgho na kiñci āha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are other nuns in the Sangha who have such behavior, reputation, and notoriety, and who harass the Sangha of nuns and hide each other’s offenses. The Sangha says nothing to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhaññeva saṅgho uññāya paribhavena akkhantiyā vebhassiyā dubbalyā evamāha— bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā. Viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of disrespect, contempt, impatience, and slander, and because you are weak that the Sangha says to you, “Sisters, you socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. Be secluded, Venerables. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi vuccamānā tatheva paggaṇheyya, sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīhi yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsitabbā tassa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that nun continues as before, the nuns should press her up to three times to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyañce samanubhāsīyamānā taṁ paṭinissajjeyya, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she then stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjeyya, ayampi bhikkhunī yāvatatiyakaṁ dhammaṁ āpannā nissāraṇīyaṁ saṅghādisesan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, then after the third announcement that nun too has committed an offense entailing sending away and suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vadeyyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha. Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, you should socialize. Don’t live separately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo evācārā evaṁsaddā evaṁsilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā. Tā saṅgho na kiñci āha”.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are other nuns in the Sangha who have such behavior, reputation, and notoriety, and who harass the Sangha of nuns and hide each other’s offenses. The Sangha says nothing to them.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhaññeva saṅgho uññāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of disrespect that the Sangha … to you: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avaññāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">because of despising. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribhavenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of contempt: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāribhabyatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">because of contemptuousness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkhantiyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of impatience: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kopena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">because of irritation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vebhassiyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of slander: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vibhassīkatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of slandering. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbalyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because … weak: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">apakkhatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of lack of supporters. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sisters, you socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viciccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Be secluded, Venerables. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā sā evaṁvādinī bhikkhunī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that nun who speaks thus. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunīhīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāhi bhikkhunīhi. Yā passanti yā suṇanti tāhi vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other nuns who see it or hear about it. They should correct her like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyye, evaṁ avaca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, don’t say such things: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha. Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, you should socialize. Don’t live separately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are other nuns in the Sangha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“… Be secluded, Venerables. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they should correct her a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvā na vadanti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If those who heard about it do not say anything, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī saṅghamajjhampi ākaḍḍhitvā vattabbā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun, even if she has to be pulled into the Sangha, should be corrected like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyye, evaṁ avaca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, don’t say such things: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha. Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, you should socialize. Don’t live separately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are other nuns in the Sangha … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viviccathāyye. Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“… Be secluded, Venerables. The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They should correct her a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi vattabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace paṭinissajjati, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she stops, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce paṭinissajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not stop, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā bhikkhunī samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Should press her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, samanubhāsitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, she should be pressed like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable nun should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā bhikkhunī saṅghena samanubhaṭṭhā bhikkhuniyo evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun so-and-so, after being pressed by the Sangha, says this to the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, you should socialize. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t live separately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo evācārā evaṁsaddā evaṁsilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are other nuns in the Sangha who have such behavior, reputation, and notoriety, and who harass the Sangha of nuns and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā saṅgho na kiñci āha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha says nothing to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhaññeva saṅgho uññāya paribhavena akkhantiyā vebhassiyā dubbalyā evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of disrespect, contempt, impatience, and slander, and because you are weak that the Sangha says to you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sisters, you socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viviccathāyye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Be secluded, Venerables. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she keeps on saying it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuniṁ samanubhāseyya tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should press her to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmā bhikkhunī saṅghena samanubhaṭṭhā bhikkhuniyo evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun so-and-so, after being pressed by the Sangha, says this to the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṁsaṭṭhāva, ayye, tumhe viharatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, you should socialize. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā tumhe nānā viharittha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t live separately. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santi saṅghe aññāpi bhikkhuniyo evācārā evaṁsaddā evaṁsilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are other nuns in the Sangha who have such behavior, reputation, and notoriety, and who harass the Sangha of nuns and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā saṅgho na kiñci āha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha says nothing to them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tumhaññeva saṅgho uññāya paribhavena akkhantiyā vebhassiyā dubbalyā evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s because of disrespect, contempt, impatience, and slander, and because you are weak that the Sangha says to you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhaginiyo kho saṁsaṭṭhā viharanti pāpācārā pāpasaddā pāpasilokā, bhikkhunisaṅghassa vihesikā, aññamaññissā vajjappaṭicchādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sisters, you socialize, behave badly, have a bad reputation, are notorious, harass the Sangha of nuns, and hide each other’s offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viviccathāyye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Be secluded, Venerables. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivekaññeva bhaginīnaṁ saṅgho vaṇṇetī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha praises seclusion for the Sisters.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā taṁ vatthuṁ na paṭinissajjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she keeps on saying it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuniṁ samanubhāsati tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha presses her to make her stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassā ayyāya khamati itthannāmāya bhikkhuniyā samanubhāsanā tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya, sā tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who approves of pressing her to make her stop should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā nakkhamati, sā bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any nun who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the second time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi etamatthaṁ vadāmi …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">For the third time I speak on this matter … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanubhaṭṭhā saṅghena itthannāmā bhikkhunī tassa vatthussa paṭinissaggāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has pressed nun so-and-so to stop. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesaṁ ajjhāpajjantiyā ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ, dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā paṭippassambhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For one who commits the offense entailing suspension, the offense of wrong conduct and the serious offenses are annulled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">That too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimāyo upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāvatatiyakanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the third announcement: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvatatiyaṁ samanubhāsanāya āpajjati, na sahavatthujjhācārā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is an offense when she has been pressed for the third time, not as soon as the misconduct has been committed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissāraṇīyanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing sending away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghamhā nissārīyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is sent away from the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghova tassā āpattiyā mānattaṁ deti, mūlāya paṭikassati, abbheti, na sambahulā na ekā bhikkhunī. Tena vuccati “saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">only the Sangha gives the trial period for that offense, sends back to the beginning, and rehabilitates—not several nuns, not an individual nun. Therefore it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva āpattinikāyassa nāmakammaṁ adhivacanaṁ, tenapi vuccati “saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the name and designation of this class of offense. Therefore, too, it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematikā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññā na paṭinissajjati, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as illegitimate, and she does not stop, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as legitimate, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asamanubhāsantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has not been pressed; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭinissajjantiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she stops; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamasaṅghādisesasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The thirteenth offense entailing suspension is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuladūsakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā kho, ayyāyo, sattarasa saṅghādisesā dhammā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, the seventeen rules on suspension have been recited, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nava paṭhamāpattikā, aṭṭha yāvatatiyakā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">nine being immediate offenses, eight after the third announcement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yesaṁ bhikkhunī aññataraṁ vā aññataraṁ vā āpajjati, tāya bhikkhuniyā ubhatosaṅghe pakkhamānattaṁ caritabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a nun commits any one of them, she must undertake a trial period for a half-month toward both Sanghas. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ciṇṇamānattā bhikkhunī yattha siyā vīsatigaṇo bhikkhunisaṅgho tattha sā bhikkhunī abbhetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When this is completed, she is to be rehabilitated wherever there is a sangha of at least twenty nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekāyapi ce ūno vīsatigaṇo bhikkhunisaṅgho taṁ bhikkhuniṁ abbheyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If that nun is rehabilitated by a sangha of nuns of even one less than twenty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā ca bhikkhunī anabbhitā, tā ca bhikkhuniyo gārayhā, ayaṁ tattha sāmīci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then that nun is not rehabilitated and those nuns are at fault. This is proper procedure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyyāyo pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In regard to this I ask you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhetthāyyāyo, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You are pure in this and therefore silent. I will remember it thus.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattarasakaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The group of seventeen is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunivibhaṅge saṅghādisesakaṇḍaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The chapter on offenses entailing suspension in the nuns’ analysis is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
