<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-ss5_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">5. Bhojanapaṭiggahaṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">5. The training rule on receiving food </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sundarīnandā bhikkhunī abhirūpā hoti dassanīyā pāsādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time there was a beautiful nun called Sundarīnandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā bhattagge sundarīnandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ passitvā avassutā avassutāya sundarīnandāya bhikkhuniyā aggamaggāni bhojanāni denti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people saw her in the dining hall, they gave her the best food, both the donors and the recipient having lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sundarīnandā bhikkhunī yāvadatthaṁ bhuñjati;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sundarīnandā ate as much as she liked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññā bhikkhuniyo na cittarūpaṁ labhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but not so the other nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā sundarīnandā avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādissati bhuñjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Sundarīnandā, being lustful, eat either fresh or cooked food after receiving it directly from a lustful man?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, sundarīnandā bhikkhunī avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādati bhuñjatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Sundarīnandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, sundarīnandā bhikkhunī avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādissati bhuñjissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Sundarīnandā, being lustful, eat either fresh or cooked food after receiving it directly from a lustful man? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī avassutā avassutassa purisapuggalassa hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, ayampi bhikkhunī paṭhamāpattikaṁ dhammaṁ āpannā nissāraṇīyaṁ saṅghādisesan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a lustful nun eats fresh or cooked food after receiving it directly from a lustful man, then that nun too has committed an immediate offense entailing sending away and suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassutā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lustful: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārattā apekkhavatī paṭibaddhacittā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having lust, longing for, in love with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avassuto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lustful: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāratto apekkhavā paṭibaddhacitto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having lust, longing for, in love with. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purisapuggalo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Man: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussapuriso, na yakkho na peto na tiracchānagato, viññū paṭibalo sārajjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a human male, not a male spirit, not a male ghost, not a male animal. He understands and is capable of having lust. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni udakadantaponaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, water, and tooth cleaners, the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she receives fresh or cooked food with the intention of eating it, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">That too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimāyo upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamāpattikanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">An immediate offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saha vatthujjhācārā āpajjati asamanubhāsanāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is an offense as soon as the misconduct is committed, and no pressing is required. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissāraṇīyanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing sending away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghamhā nissārīyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is sent away from the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati saṅghādisesoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakadantaponaṁ paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she receives water or a tooth cleaner, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoavassute “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If only the man has lust, and she receives fresh or cooked food with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakadantaponaṁ paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she receives water or a tooth cleaner, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhatoavassute yakkhassa vā petassa vā paṇḍakassa vā tiracchānagatamanussaviggahassa vā hatthato “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If both of them have lust, and she receives fresh or cooked food with the intention of eating it directly from a male spirit, a male ghost, a _paṇḍaka_, or a male animal in human form, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakadantaponaṁ paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she receives water or a tooth cleaner, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoavassute “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If only the male being has lust, and she receives fresh or cooked food with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakadantaponaṁ paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she receives water or a tooth cleaner, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhatoanavassutā honti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if both are without lust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anavassuto”ti jānantī paṭiggaṇhāti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she receives, knowing that the man has no lust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasaṅghādisesasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth offense entailing suspension is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
