<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-ss1_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">1. Ussayavādikāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">1. The training rule on being litigious </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho panāyyāyo sattarasa saṅghādisesā dhammā uddesaṁ āgacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerables, these seventeen rules on suspension come up for recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro upāsako bhikkhunisaṅghassa udositaṁ datvā kālaṅkato hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a lay follower who had given a storehouse to the Sangha of nuns had died. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa dve puttā honti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He had two sons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eko assaddho appasanno, eko saddho pasanno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one with and one without faith and confidence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te pettikaṁ sāpateyyaṁ vibhajiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they divided their father’s property between them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so assaddho appasanno taṁ saddhaṁ pasannaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then the one without faith said to the other, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“amhākaṁ udosito, taṁ bhājemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The storehouse is ours; let’s share it out.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vutte, so saddho pasanno taṁ assaddhaṁ appasannaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the one with faith responded, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyyo, evaṁ avaca.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākaṁ pitunā bhikkhunisaṅghassa dinno”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">our father gave it to the Sangha of nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho so assaddho appasanno taṁ saddhaṁ pasannaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time they both said the same thing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“amhākaṁ udosito, taṁ bhājemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so saddho pasanno taṁ assaddhaṁ appasannaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyyo, evaṁ avaca.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākaṁ pitunā bhikkhunisaṅghassa dinno”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho so assaddho appasanno taṁ saddhaṁ pasannaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time the one without faith repeated his proposal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“amhākaṁ udosito, taṁ bhājemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so saddho pasanno—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The one with faith then thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace mayhaṁ bhavissati, ahampi bhikkhunisaṅghassa dassāmī”ti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If I get it, I too would give it to the Sangha of nuns,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṁ assaddhaṁ appasannaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhājemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Let’s share it out.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so udosito tehi bhājīyamāno tassa assaddhassa appasannassa pāpuṇāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But when they shared out that storehouse, it fell to the one without faith. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so assaddho appasanno bhikkhuniyo upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then went to the nuns and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“nikkhamathāyye, amhākaṁ udosito”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please leave, Venerables, this storehouse is mine.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vutte thullanandā bhikkhunī taṁ purisaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun Thullanandā said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyyo, evaṁ avaca, tumhākaṁ pitunā bhikkhunisaṅghassa dinno”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, your father gave it to the Sangha of nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dinno na dinno”ti vohārike mahāmatte pucchiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because they were unable to agree, they asked judges to decide on the matter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāmattā evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ko, ayye, jānāti bhikkhunisaṅghassa dinno”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, who knows that it was given to the Sangha of nuns?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vutte, thullanandā bhikkhunī te mahāmatte etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā replied, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“api nāyyā tumhehi diṭṭhaṁ vā sutaṁ vā sakkhiṁ ṭhapayitvā dānaṁ diyyamānan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But Sirs, didn’t you appoint a witness who saw or heard the giving of the gift?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te mahāmattā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kho ayyā āhā”ti taṁ udositaṁ bhikkhunisaṅghassa akaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true what the Venerable says,” the judges made the storehouse the property of the Sangha of nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso parājito ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The defeated man complained and criticized the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇiyo imā muṇḍā bandhakiniyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They’re not monastics these shaven-headed sluts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma amhākaṁ udositaṁ acchindāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How could they take my storehouse?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī mahāmattānaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā told the judges of this </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāmattā taṁ purisaṁ daṇḍāpesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they punished him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso daṇḍito bhikkhunupassayassa avidūre ājīvakaseyyaṁ kārāpetvā ājīvake uyyojesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That man then made a dwelling place for Ājīvaka ascetics not far from the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“etā bhikkhuniyo accāvadathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">inciting them to abuse the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī mahāmattānaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Once again Thullanandā told the judges </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāmattā taṁ purisaṁ bandhāpesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the judges jailed him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People then complained and criticized those nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“paṭhamaṁ bhikkhuniyo udositaṁ acchindāpesuṁ, dutiyaṁ daṇḍāpesuṁ, tatiyaṁ bandhāpesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“First the nuns take his storehouse, then they have him punished, and then they have him jailed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idāni ghātāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now they’ll have him executed!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nuns heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā ussayavādikā viharissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā be litigious?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then those nuns told the monks … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī ussayavādikā viharatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā is litigious?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī ussayavādikā viharissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā be litigious? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī ussayavādikā vihareyya gahapatinā vā gahapatiputtena vā dāsena vā kammakārena vā antamaso samaṇaparibbājakenāpi, ayaṁ bhikkhunī paṭhamāpattikaṁ dhammaṁ āpannā nissāraṇīyaṁ saṅghādisesan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun is litigious toward a householder or a householder’s child or a slave or a worker or even toward a monastic or a wanderer, then that nun has committed an immediate offense entailing sending away and suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ussayavādikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Litigious: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍakārikā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what is meant is that she is the initiator of a lawsuit. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapatiputto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder’s child: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye keci puttabhātaro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever is a child or a sibling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dāso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A slave: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antojāto dhanakkīto karamarānīto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one born in the household, one who has been bought, one who has been brought back as a captive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammakāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A worker: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhaṭako āhatako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a paid worker, a servant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇaparibbājako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monastic or a wanderer: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuñca bhikkhuniñca sikkhamānañca sāmaṇerañca sāmaṇeriñca ṭhapetvā yo koci paribbājakasamāpanno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who is a wanderer apart from Buddhist monks, nuns, trainee nuns, novice monks, and novice nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aḍḍaṁ karissāmīti dutiyaṁ vā pariyesati gacchati vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, thinking, “I’ll initiate a lawsuit,” she looks for a companion or just goes there herself, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekassa āroceti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she tells one other person, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyassa āroceti, āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she tells a second person, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aḍḍapariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the end of the lawsuit, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamāpattikanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">An immediate offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saha vatthujjhācārā āpajjati asamanubhāsanāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is an offense as soon as the misconduct is committed, and no pressing is required. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissāraṇīyanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing sending away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghamhā nissārīyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is sent away from the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghova tassā āpattiyā mānattaṁ deti mūlāya paṭikassati abbheti, na sambahulā na ekā bhikkhunī. Tena vuccati “saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">only the Sangha gives the trial period for that offense, sends back to the beginning, and rehabilitates—not several nuns, not an individual nun. Therefore it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasseva āpattinikāyassa nāmakammaṁ adhivacanaṁ. Tenapi vuccati “saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the name and designation of this class of offense. Therefore, too, it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">manussehi ākaḍḍhīyamānā gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she goes there because people pull her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārakkhaṁ yācati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is asking for protection; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anodissa ācikkhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she tells without specifying a person; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"/></p>
<p class="p3">if she is deranged; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5"/></p>
<p class="p3">if she is overwhelmed by pain; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamasaṅghādisesasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first offense entailing suspension is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
