<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-ss4_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">4. Ukkhittakaosāraṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">4. The training rule on reinstating one who has been ejected </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī bhaṇḍanakārikā hoti kalahakārikā vivādakārikā bhassakārikā saṅghe adhikaraṇakārikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Caṇḍakāḷī was quarrelsome and argumentative, and she created legal issues in the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī tassā kamme karīyamāne paṭikkosati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But when a legal procedure was being done against her, the nun Thullanandā objected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī gāmakaṁ agamāsi kenacideva karaṇīyena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards Thullanandā went to a village on some business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhikkhunisaṅgho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha of nuns </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“thullanandā bhikkhunī pakkantā”ti, caṇḍakāḷiṁ bhikkhuniṁ āpattiyā adassane ukkhipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">took the opportunity to eject Caṇḍakāḷī for not recognizing an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī gāmake taṁ karaṇīyaṁ tīretvā punadeva sāvatthiṁ paccāgacchi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When Thullanandā had finished her business in that village, she returned to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā āgacchantiyā neva āsanaṁ paññapesi na pādodakaṁ pādapīṭhaṁ pādakaṭhalikaṁ upanikkhipi na paccuggantvā pattacīvaraṁ paṭiggahesi na pānīyena āpucchi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On her return, Caṇḍakāḷī neither prepared a seat for her, nor set out a foot stool, a foot scraper, or water for washing the feet; and she did not go out to meet her to receive her bowl and robe, nor ask whether she wanted water to drink. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī caṇḍakāḷiṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā asked her </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, ayye, mayi āgacchantiyā neva āsanaṁ paññapesi na pādodakaṁ pādapīṭhaṁ pādakaṭhalikaṁ upanikkhipi na paccuggantvā pattacīvaraṁ paṭiggahesi na pānīyena āpucchī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">why she was acting like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañhetaṁ, ayye, hoti yathā taṁ anāthāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She replied, “That’s how it is, Venerable, when you don’t have a protector.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kissa pana tvaṁ, ayye, anāthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how is it, Venerable, that you don’t have a protector?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imā maṁ, ayye, bhikkhuniyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When the nuns knew </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṁ anāthā appaññātā, natthi imissā kāci paṭivattā’ti, āpattiyā adassane ukkhipiṁsū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that no one would speak up for me because I am not esteemed by them and I didn’t have a protector, they ejected me for not recognizing an offense.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bālā etā abyattā etā, neva jānanti kammaṁ vā kammadosaṁ vā kammavipattiṁ vā kammasampattiṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They are incompetent fools. They don’t know about legal procedures or their flaws, nor what makes them fail or succeed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayaṁ kho jānāma kammampi kammadosampi kammavipattimpi kammasampattimpi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But we know all these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayaṁ kho akataṁ vā kammaṁ kāreyyāma kataṁ vā kammaṁ kopeyyāmā”ti, lahuṁ lahuṁ bhikkhunisaṅghaṁ sannipātetvā caṇḍakāḷiṁ bhikkhuniṁ osāresi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">We can get legal procedures done that haven’t been done, and we can get procedures that have been done overturned.” And she quickly gathered a sangha of nuns and reinstated the nun Caṇḍakāḷī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ bhikkhuniṁ dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anapaloketvā kārakasaṅghaṁ anaññāya gaṇassa chandaṁ osāressatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā reinstate a nun who had been ejected by a unanimous Sangha in accordance with the rule, the Monastic Law, and the Teacher’s instruction, without first getting permission from the Sangha that did the legal procedure and without the consent of the group?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ bhikkhuniṁ dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anapaloketvā kārakasaṅghaṁ anaññāya gaṇassa chandaṁ osāretī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ bhikkhuniṁ dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anapaloketvā kārakasaṅghaṁ anaññāya gaṇassa chandaṁ osāressati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā reinstate a nun who had been ejected by a unanimous Sangha in accordance with the rule, the Monastic Law, and the Teacher’s instruction, without first getting permission from the Sangha that did the legal procedure and without the consent of the group? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī samaggena saṅghena ukkhittaṁ bhikkhuniṁ dhammena vinayena satthusāsanena anapaloketvā kārakasaṅghaṁ anaññāya gaṇassa chandaṁ osāreyya, ayampi bhikkhunī paṭhamāpattikaṁ dhammaṁ āpannā nissāraṇīyaṁ saṅghādisesan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun, without getting permission from the Sangha that did the legal procedure and without the consent of the group, reinstates a nun who has been ejected by a unanimous Sangha in accordance with the rule and the Monastic Law and the Teacher’s instruction, then that nun too has committed an immediate offense entailing sending away and suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaggo nāma saṅgho</span></p>
<p class="p3">A unanimous Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samānasaṁvāsako samānasīmāyaṁ ṭhito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">those belonging to the same Buddhist sect and staying within the same monastic boundary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkhittā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who has been ejected: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpattiyā adassane vā appaṭikamme vā appaṭinissagge vā ukkhittā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has been ejected for not recognizing an offense, for not making amends, or for not giving up a bad view. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammena vinayenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">In accordance with the rule and the Monastic Law: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena dhammena yena vinayena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in accordance with that rule, in accordance with that Monastic Law. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthusāsanenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">In accordance with the Teacher’s instruction: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jinasāsanena buddhasāsanena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in accordance with the Conqueror’s instruction, in accordance with the Buddha’s instruction. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anapaloketvā kārakasaṅghanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without getting permission from the Sangha that did the legal procedure: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammakārakasaṅghaṁ anāpucchā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">without having asked permission of the Sangha that did the legal procedure of ejection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññāya gaṇassa chandanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without the consent of the group: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gaṇassa chandaṁ ajānitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">without being aware of any consent from the group. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Osāressāmī”ti gaṇaṁ vā pariyesati, sīmaṁ vā sammannati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, intending to reinstate her, she searches for a group or establishes a monastic boundary, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ, dvīhi kammavācāhi thullaccayā, kammavācāpariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. After each of the first two announcements, she commits a serious offense. When the last announcement is finished, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">That too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimāyo upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamāpattikanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">An immediate offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saha vatthujjhācārā āpajjati asamanubhāsanāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is an offense as soon as the misconduct is committed, and no pressing is required. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissāraṇīyanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing sending away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghamhā nissārīyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is sent away from the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati saṅghādisesoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme dhammakammasaññā osāreti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, and she reinstates her, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme vematikā osāreti āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, and she reinstates her, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammakamme adhammakammasaññā osāreti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as illegitimate, and she reinstates her, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme dhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as legitimate, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammakamme adhammakammasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kammakārakasaṅghaṁ apaloketvā osāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she reinstates her after getting permission from the Sangha that did the procedure; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gaṇassa chandaṁ jānitvā osāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she reinstates her with the consent of the group; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vatte vattantiṁ osāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she reinstates one who is behaving properly; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asante kammakārakasaṅghe osāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she reinstates her when the Sangha that did the procedure is unavailable; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthasaṅghādisesasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth offense entailing suspension is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
