<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-ss6_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">6. Dutiyabhojanapaṭiggahaṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">6. The second training rule on receiving food </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sundarīnandā bhikkhunī abhirūpā hoti dassanīyā pāsādikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time there was a beautiful nun called Sundarīnandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā bhattagge sundarīnandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ passitvā avassutā sundarīnandāya bhikkhuniyā aggamaggāni bhojanāni denti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people saw her in the dining hall, they were affected by lust, and they gave her the best food. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sundarīnandā bhikkhunī kukkuccāyantī na paṭiggaṇhāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Being afraid of wrongdoing, Sundarīnandā did not receive it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anantarikā bhikkhunī sundarīnandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun next to her said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, ayye, na paṭiggaṇhāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why didn’t you receive it, Venerable?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Avassutā, ayye”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Because they have lust.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tvaṁ pana, ayye, avassutā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But do you have lust?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nāhaṁ, ayye, avassutā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ te, ayye, eso purisapuggalo karissati avassuto vā anavassuto vā, yato tvaṁ anavassutā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What can this man do to you, whether he has lust or not, when you’re without it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iṅgha, ayye, yaṁ te eso purisapuggalo deti khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā taṁ tvaṁ sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khāda vā, bhuñja vā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Go on, Venerable, receive it with your own hands, and eat whatever fresh or cooked food he gives you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī evaṁ vakkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kiṁ te, ayye, eso purisapuggalo karissati avassuto vā anavassuto vā, yato tvaṁ anavassutā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘What can this man do to you, whether he has lust or not, when you’re without it? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iṅgha, ayye, yaṁ te eso purisapuggalo deti khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā taṁ tvaṁ sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khāda vā bhuñja vā’”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Go on, Venerable, receive it with your own hands, and eat whatever fresh or cooked food he gives you’?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī evaṁ vadeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun said this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kiṁ te, ayye, eso purisapuggalo karissati avassuto vā anavassuto vā yato tvaṁ anavassutā.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iṅgha, ayye, yaṁ te eso purisapuggalo deti khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā taṁ tvaṁ sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khāda vā bhuñja vā’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī evaṁ vakkhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun say this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kiṁ te, ayye, eso purisapuggalo karissati avassuto vā anavassuto vā yato tvaṁ anavassutā;</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">iṅgha, ayye, yaṁ te eso purisapuggalo deti khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā taṁ tvaṁ sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khāda vā bhuñja vā’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī evaṁ vadeyya— ‘kiṁ te, ayye, eso purisapuggalo karissati avassuto vā anavassuto vā, yato tvaṁ anavassutā. Iṅgha, ayye, yaṁ te eso purisapuggalo deti khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā taṁ tvaṁ sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khāda vā bhuñja vā’ti, ayampi bhikkhunī paṭhamāpattikaṁ dhammaṁ āpannā nissāraṇīyaṁ saṅghādisesan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun says, “Venerable, what can this man do to you, whether he has lust or not, if you’re without? Go on, Venerable, receive it with your own hands and then eat whatever fresh or cooked food he gives you,” then that nun too has committed an immediate offense entailing sending away and suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ vadeyyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Says: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ te, ayye, eso purisapuggalo karissati avassuto vā anavassuto vā, yato tvaṁ anavassutā. Iṅgha, ayye, yaṁ te eso purisapuggalo deti khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā taṁ tvaṁ sahatthā paṭiggahetvā khāda vā bhuñja vā”ti uyyojeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she urges her on, saying, “Venerable, what can this man do to you, whether he has lust or not, if you’re without? Go on, Venerable, receive it with your own hands and then eat whatever fresh or cooked food he gives you,” then she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā vacanena “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, because of her statement, the other nun receives fresh or cooked food with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanapariyosāne āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the end of the meal, she commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayampīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">That too: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purimāyo upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is said with reference to the preceding offenses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamāpattikanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">An immediate offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saha vatthujjhācārā āpajjati asamanubhāsanāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is an offense as soon as the misconduct is committed, and no pressing is required. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissāraṇīyanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing sending away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghamhā nissārīyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is sent away from the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati saṅghādisesoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakadantaponaṁ “paṭiggaṇhā”ti uyyojeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she urges her on to receive water or a tooth cleaner, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā vacanena “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, because of her statement, the other nun receives it with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekatoavassute yakkhassa vā petassa vā paṇḍakassa vā tiracchānagatamanussaviggahassa vā hatthato khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā “khāda vā bhuñja vā”ti uyyojeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, when only the male being has lust, she urges her on to eat fresh or cooked food received directly from a male spirit, a male ghost, a _paṇḍaka_, or a male animal in human form, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā vacanena “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, because of her statement, the other nun receives it with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanapariyosāne āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At the end of the meal, she commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakadantaponaṁ paṭiggaṇhāti uyyojeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she urges her on to receive water or a tooth cleaner, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā vacanena “khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, because of her statement, the other nun receives it with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anavassuto”ti jānantī uyyojeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she urges her on, knowing that he has no lust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kupitā na paṭiggaṇhātī”ti uyyojeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she urges her on, thinking that she is not receiving because of anger; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kulānuddayatāya na paṭiggaṇhātī”ti uyyojeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she urges her on, thinking that she is not receiving because of compassion for the family; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhasaṅghādisesasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth offense entailing suspension is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
