<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-np12_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">12. Cīvaravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2. Lahupāvuraṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">12. The training rule on light cloaks </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī bahussutā hoti bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā was a learned reciter, and she was confident and skilled at giving teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo uṇhakāle mahagghaṁ khomaṁ pārupitvā yena thullanandā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On one occasion when the weather was warm, king Pasenadi of Kosala dressed in an expensive linen cloak and went to Thullanandā. He bowed and sat down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekamantaṁ nisinnaṁ kho rājānaṁ pasenadiṁ kosalaṁ thullanandā bhikkhunī dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṁsesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And Thullanandā instructed, inspired, and gladdened him with a teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā dhammiyā kathāya sandassito samādapito samuttejito sampahaṁsito thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vadeyyāsi, ayye, yena attho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, please say what you need.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace me tvaṁ, mahārāja, dātukāmosi, imaṁ khomaṁ dehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Great king, if you wish to give me something, then give me this linen cloak.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho rājā pasenadi kosalo thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā khomaṁ datvā uṭṭhāyāsanā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The king gave her his cloak. He then got up from his seat, bowed down, circumambulated her with his right side toward her, and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mahicchā imā bhikkhuniyo asantuṭṭhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These nuns have great desires; they are not content. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma rājānaṁ khomaṁ viññāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How can they ask the king for his linen cloak?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā rājānaṁ khomaṁ viññāpessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā ask the king for his linen cloak?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī rājānaṁ khomaṁ viññāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā asked for this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī rājānaṁ khomaṁ viññāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā ask the king for his linen cloak? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Lahupāvuraṇaṁ pana bhikkhuniyā cetāpentiyā aḍḍhateyyakaṁsaparamaṁ cetāpetabbaṁ. Tato ce uttari cetāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun carries out an exchange to get a light cloak, it is to be worth at most two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins. If she gets one in exchange that is worth more than that, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lahupāvuraṇaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A light cloak: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci uṇhakāle pāvuraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever cloak is used in warm weather. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cetāpentiyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Carries out an exchange to get: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāpentiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">asks for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aḍḍhateyyakaṁsaparamaṁ cetāpetabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is to be worth at most two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasakahāpaṇagghanakaṁ cetāpetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it may be worth ten _kahāpaṇa_ coins. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari cetāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she gets one in exchange that is worth more than that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatuttari viññāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asks for one worth more than that, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she gets it, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā ekabhikkhuniyā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is to be relinquished to the Sangha of nuns, a group, or an individual nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it’s to be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in Nuns’ Relinquishment 1, [](pli-tv-bi-vb-np1:2.1.21--2.1.43), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, ayye, lahupāvuraṇaṁ atirekaaḍḍhateyyakaṁsaparamaṁ cetāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ, imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this light cloak worth more than two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins, which I got in exchange, is to be relinquished. I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyun”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayyāya dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekaaḍḍhateyyakaṁse atirekasaññā cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is worth more than two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins, and she perceives it as such, and she gets it in exchange, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekaaḍḍhateyyakaṁse vematikā cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is worth more than two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins, but she is unsure of it, and she gets it in exchange, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekaaḍḍhateyyakaṁse ūnakasaññā cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is worth more than two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins, but she perceives it as worth less, and she gets it in exchange, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakaaḍḍhateyyakaṁse atirekasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is worth less than two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins, but she perceives it as worth more, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakaaḍḍhateyyakaṁse vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is worth less than two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakaaḍḍhateyyakaṁse ūnakasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is worth less than two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins, and she perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍhateyyakaṁsaparamaṁ cetāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she carries out an exchange for one worth at most two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakaaḍḍhateyyakaṁsaparamaṁ cetāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she carries out an exchange for one worth less than two-and-a-half _kaṁsa_ coins; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of her own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahagghaṁ cetāpetukāmassa appagghaṁ cetāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gets one in exchange that has little value from someone who wants to exchange one of great value; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvādasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The twelfth training rule is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Dutiya) Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">10 Pariṇatasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā kho, ayyāyo, tiṁsa nissaggiyā pācittiyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, the thirty rules on relinquishment and confession have been recited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyyāyo pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In regard to this I ask you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhetthāyyāyo, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You are pure in this and therefore silent. I will remember it thus.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunivibhaṅge nissaggiyakaṇḍaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The chapter on offenses entailing relinquishment in the nuns’ analysis is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
