<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-np2_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2. Akālacīvarabhājanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">2. The training rule on the sharing out of out-of-season robe-cloth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhuniyo gāmakāvāse vassaṁvuṭṭhā sāvatthiṁ agamaṁsu vattasampannā iriyāpathasampannā duccoḷā lūkhacīvarā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time, after completing the rainy-season residence in a village monastery, a number of nuns were traveling to Sāvatthī. They were perfect in conduct and deportment, but poorly dressed in shabby robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakā tā bhikkhuniyo passitvā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Some lay followers who saw them thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imā bhikkhuniyo vattasampannā iriyāpathasampannā duccoḷā lūkhacīvarā, imā bhikkhuniyo acchinnā bhavissantī”ti bhikkhunisaṅghassa akālacīvaraṁ adaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These nuns are perfect in conduct and deportment, but poorly dressed in shabby robes; they must’ve been robbed,” and they gave out-of-season robe-cloth to the Sangha of nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because they had done the robe-making procedure, the nun Thullanandā </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“amhākaṁ kathinaṁ atthataṁ kālacīvaran”ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">determined it as in-season robe-cloth, and then shared it out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakā tā bhikkhuniyo passitvā etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The lay followers asked those nuns whether </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“apayyāhi cīvaraṁ laddhan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">they had obtained any robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na mayaṁ, āvuso, cīvaraṁ labhāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They replied that they hadn’t </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayyā thullanandā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘amhākaṁ kathinaṁ atthataṁ kālacīvaran’ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpesī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upāsakā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those lay followers then complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā akālacīvaraṁ ‘kālacīvaran’ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā determine out-of-season robe-cloth as ‘in-season’, and then share it out?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ upāsakānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those lay followers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā akālacīvaraṁ ‘kālacīvaran’ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those nuns then told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">who in turn told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī akālacīvaraṁ ‘kālacīvaran’ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī akālacīvaraṁ “kālacīvaran”ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī akālacīvaraṁ ‘kālacīvaran’ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun determines out-of-season robe-cloth as “in-season”, and then shares it out, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akālacīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Out-of-season robe-cloth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthate kathine ekādasamāse uppannaṁ, atthate kathine sattamāse uppannaṁ, kālepi ādissa dinnaṁ, etaṁ akālacīvaraṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the robe-making procedure has not been done, robe-cloth that is given during the eleven months. If the robe-making procedure has been done, robe-cloth that is given during the seven months. Also, if it is given in the robe season, but the cloth is designated, it is called “out-of-season robe-cloth”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akālacīvaraṁ “kālacīvaran”ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she shares it out, after determining out-of-season robe-cloth as “in-season”, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she gets it, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā ekabhikkhuniyā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-cloth is to be relinquished to the Sangha of nuns, a group, or an individual nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it’s to be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in Nuns’ Relinquishment 1, [](pli-tv-bi-vb-np1:2.1.21--2.1.43), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, ayye, akālacīvaraṁ ‘kālacīvaran’ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ, imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘Venerables, this out-of-season robe-cloth, which I shared out after determining it as “in-season”, is to be relinquished. I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyun”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayyāya dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe-cloth back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akālacīvare akālacīvarasaññā “kālacīvaran”ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is out-of-season robe-cloth and she perceives it as such, and she shares it out after determining it as “in-season”, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akālacīvare vematikā “kālacīvaran”ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is out-of-season robe-cloth, but she is unsure of it, and she shares it out after determining it as “in-season”, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akālacīvare kālacīvarasaññā “kālacīvaran”ti adhiṭṭhahitvā bhājāpeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is out-of-season robe-cloth, but she perceives it as in-season robe-cloth, and she shares it out after determining it as “in-season”, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālacīvare akālacīvarasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is in-season robe-cloth, but she perceives it as out-of-season robe-cloth, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālacīvare vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is in-season robe-cloth, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kālacīvare kālacīvarasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is in-season robe-cloth and she perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akālacīvaraṁ kālacīvarasaññā bhājāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she shares out out-of-season robe-cloth that she perceives as in-season; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kālacīvaraṁ kālacīvarasaññā bhājāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she shares out in-season robe-cloth that she perceives as in-season; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
