<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-np5_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">5. Aññacetāpanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">5. The training rule on exchanging for something else </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī gilānā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nun Thullanandā was sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho aññataro upāsako yena thullanandā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A lay follower went to her and asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, ayye, khamanīyaṁ kacci yāpanīyan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you’re bearing up, Venerable, I hope you’re getting better?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na me, āvuso, khamanīyaṁ, na yāpanīyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’m not bearing up, and I’m not getting better.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Amukassa, ayye, āpaṇikassa ghare kahāpaṇaṁ nikkhipissāmi, tato yaṁ iccheyyāsi taṁ āharāpeyyāsī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We’ll deposit a _kahāpaṇa_ coin in such-and-such a shop. Please get whatever you wish from there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī aññataraṁ sikkhamānaṁ āṇāpesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā then said to a trainee nun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gaccha, sikkhamāne, amukassa āpaṇikassa gharā kahāpaṇassa telaṁ āharā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Go to such-and-such a shop and bring back a _kahāpaṇa_’s worth of oil.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā sikkhamānā tassa āpaṇikassa gharā kahāpaṇassa telaṁ āharitvā thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That trainee nun did just that and gave it to Thullanandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na me, sikkhamāne, telena attho, sappinā me attho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I don’t need oil; I need ghee.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā sikkhamānā yena so āpaṇiko tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ āpaṇikaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The trainee nun returned to the shopkeeper and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na kira, āvuso, ayyāya telena attho, sappinā attho, handa te telaṁ, sappiṁ me dehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It seems the nun doesn’t need oil, but ghee. Here’s your oil; please give me ghee.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sace mayaṁ, ayye, vikkītaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ puna ādiyissāma, kadā amhākaṁ bhaṇḍaṁ vikkāyissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, if we were to take back goods that have been sold, when would our goods be sold? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Telassa kayena telaṁ haṭaṁ, sappissa kayaṁ āhara, sappiṁ harissasī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When oil is bought, oil is taken away. Buying ghee, you receive that, and you’ll take that away.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā sikkhamānā rodantī aṭṭhāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The trainee nun started to cry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo taṁ sikkhamānaṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns asked her </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, sikkhamāne, rodasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">why, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā sikkhamānā bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and she told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā aññaṁ cetāpetvā aññaṁ cetāpessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā get one thing in exchange and then something else?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī aññaṁ cetāpetvā aññaṁ cetāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī aññaṁ cetāpetvā aññaṁ cetāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā get one thing in exchange and then something else? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī aññaṁ cetāpetvā aññaṁ cetāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun gets one thing in exchange and then something else, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ cetāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gets one thing in exchange: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci cetāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever she gets in exchange. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ cetāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then something else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taṁ ṭhapetvā aññaṁ cetāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from that thing, if she gets something else in exchange, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she gets it, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā ekabhikkhuniyā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is to be relinquished to the Sangha of nuns, a group, or an individual nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it’s to be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in Nuns’ Relinquishment 1, [](pli-tv-bi-vb-np1:2.1.21--2.1.43), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, ayye, aññaṁ cetāpetvā aññaṁ cetāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ, imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… ‘Venerables, this thing, which I got in exchange, having first got something else in exchange, is to be relinquished. I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ayyāya dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññe aññasaññā aññaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is something else and she perceives it as such, and she gets that in exchange, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññe vematikā aññaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is something else, but she is unsure of it, and she gets that in exchange, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññe anaññasaññā aññaṁ cetāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is something else, but she does not perceive it as such, and she gets that in exchange, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññe aññasaññā anaññaṁ cetāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not something else, but she perceives it as such, and she gets that in exchange, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññe vematikā anaññaṁ cetāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not something else, but she is unsure of it, and she gets that in exchange, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaññe anaññasaññā anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not something else, and she does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taññeva cetāpeti, aññañca cetāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gets both in exchange at the same time; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ānisaṁsaṁ dassetvā cetāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she demonstrates a benefit and then gets it in exchange; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
