<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-np1_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">1. Pattasannicayasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">1. The training rule on collections of almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho panāyyāyo tiṁsa nissaggiyā pācittiyā dhammā uddesaṁ āgacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerables, these thirty rules on relinquishment and confession come up for recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo bahū patte sannicayaṁ karonti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nuns from the group of six had collected a large number of almsbowls. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā vihāracārikaṁ āhiṇḍantā passitvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people walking about the dwellings saw this, they complained and criticized those nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo bahū patte sannicayaṁ karissanti, pattavāṇijjaṁ vā bhikkhuniyo karissanti, āmattikāpaṇaṁ vā pasāressantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns collect a large number of bowls? Will they start up as bowl merchants or set up a bowl shop?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized those nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo pattasannicayaṁ karissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six collect bowls?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo pattasannicayaṁ karontī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nuns from the group of six do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo pattasannicayaṁ karissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six collect bowls? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī pattasannicayaṁ kareyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun collects almsbowls, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Patto nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An almsbowl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve pattā— ayopatto, mattikāpatto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are two kinds of bowls: the iron bowl and the ceramic bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tayo pattassa vaṇṇā— ukkaṭṭho patto, majjhimo patto, omako patto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And there are three grades of bowl: the large bowl, the medium bowl, and the small bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ukkaṭṭho nāma patto</span></p>
<p class="p3">The large bowl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aḍḍhāḷhakodanaṁ gaṇhāti catubhāgaṁ khādanaṁ tadupiyaṁ byañjanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it takes half an _āḷhaka_ measure of boiled rice, a fourth part of fresh food, and a suitable amount of curry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Majjhimo nāma patto</span></p>
<p class="p3">The medium bowl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāḷikodanaṁ gaṇhāti catubhāgaṁ khādanaṁ tadupiyaṁ byañjanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it takes a _nāḷika_ measure of boiled rice, a fourth part of fresh food, and a suitable amount of curry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Omako nāma patto</span></p>
<p class="p3">The small bowl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">patthodanaṁ gaṇhāti catubhāgaṁ khādanaṁ tadupiyaṁ byañjanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it takes a _pattha_ measure of boiled rice, a fourth part of fresh food, and a suitable amount of curry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ukkaṭṭho apatto omako apatto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Anything larger than this is not a bowl, nor anything smaller. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sannicayaṁ kareyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Collects: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anadhiṭṭhito avikappito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">almsbowls that have neither been determined nor transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyo hotīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Entailing relinquishment: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saha aruṇuggamanā nissaggiyo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">entailing relinquishment at dawn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbo saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā ekabhikkhuniyā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The bowl is to be relinquished to the Sangha, a group, or an individual nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it’s to be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya bhikkhuniyā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha, that nun should put her upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior nuns. She should then squat on her heels, raise her joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ me, ayye, patto rattātikkanto nissaggiyo, imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this almsbowl, which I have kept for more than one day, is to be relinquished. I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, she is to confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya āpatti paṭiggahetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by a competent and capable nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṭṭhapatto dātabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The relinquished bowl is then to be given back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṇātu me, ayye, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ patto itthannāmāya bhikkhuniyā nissaggiyo saṅghassa nissaṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This almsbowl, which was to be relinquished by the nun so-and-so, has been relinquished to the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho imaṁ pattaṁ itthannāmāya bhikkhuniyā dadeyyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should give this bowl back to nun so-and-so.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya bhikkhuniyā sambahulā bhikkhuniyo upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassu vacanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching several nuns, that nun should put her upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior nuns. She should then squat on her heels, raise her joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ me, ayyāyo, patto rattātikkanto nissaggiyo, imāhaṁ ayyānaṁ nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this almsbowl, which I have kept for more than one day, is to be relinquished. I relinquish it to the venerables.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, she is to confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibalāya āpatti paṭiggahetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by a competent and capable nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṭṭhapatto dātabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The relinquished bowl is then to be given back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṇantu me, ayyāyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask you to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ patto itthannāmāya bhikkhuniyā nissaggiyo ayyānaṁ nissaṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This almsbowl, which was to be relinquished by the nun so-and-so, has been relinquished to you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi ayyānaṁ pattakallaṁ, ayyāyo, imaṁ pattaṁ itthannāmāya bhikkhuniyā dadeyyun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to you, you should give this bowl back to nun so-and-so.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya bhikkhuniyā ekaṁ bhikkhuniṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching a single nun, that nun should put her upper robe over one shoulder, squat on her heels, raise her joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ me, ayye, patto rattātikkanto nissaggiyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This almsbowl, which I have kept for more than one day, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ ayyāya nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to you.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, she is to confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāya bhikkhuniyā āpatti paṭiggahetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by that nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaṭṭhapatto dātabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The relinquished bowl is then to be given back: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ pattaṁ ayyāya dammī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this almsbowl back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattātikkante atikkantasaññā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than one day and she perceives it as more, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattātikkante vematikā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than one day, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattātikkante anatikkantasaññā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than one day, but she perceives it as less, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anadhiṭṭhite adhiṭṭhitasaññā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been determined, but she perceives that it has, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avikappite vikappitasaññā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been transferred, but she perceives that it has, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avissajjite vissajjitasaññā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been given away, but she perceives that it has, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anaṭṭhe naṭṭhasaññā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not lost, but she perceives that it is … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avinaṭṭhe vinaṭṭhasaññā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been ruined, but she perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhinne bhinnasaññā …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not broken, but she perceives that it is … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avilutte viluttasaññā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been stolen, but she perceives that it has, she commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyaṁ pattaṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she uses an almsbowl that should be relinquished without first relinquishing it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattānatikkante atikkantasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than one day, but she perceives it as more, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattānatikkante vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than one day, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattānatikkante anatikkantasaññā anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than one day and she perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antoaruṇe adhiṭṭheti, vikappeti, vissajjeti, nassati, vinassati, bhijjati, acchinditvā gaṇhanti, vissāsaṁ gaṇhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, before dawn, it is determined, transferred to another, given away, lost, ruined, broken, stolen, or taken on trust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo nissaṭṭhapattaṁ na denti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the nuns from the group of six did not give back a relinquished bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na, bhikkhave, nissaṭṭhapatto na dātabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, a relinquished almsbowl is to be given back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā na dadeyya, āpatti dukkaṭassā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a nun doesn’t give it back, she commits an offense of wrong conduct.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The first training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
