<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc85_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattupāhanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on sunshades and sandals </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">85. Yānasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">85. The training rule on vehicles </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo yānena yāyanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nuns from the group of six were traveling in vehicles. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo yānena yāyissanti, seyyathāpi gihiniyo kāmabhoginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns travel in a vehicle? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo yānena yāyissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six travel in a vehicle?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo yānena yāyantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that those nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo yānena yāyissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī yānena yāyeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun travels in a vehicle, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhunīnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī gilānā hoti, na sakkoti padasā gantuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards there was a sick nun who was not able to travel on foot. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. The Buddha then had the Sangha gathered and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānāya bhikkhuniyā yānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a sick nun to use a vehicle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī agilānā yānena yāyeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun who is not sick travels in a vehicle, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is not sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkoti padasā gantuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is able to travel on foot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkoti padasā gantuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is unable to travel on foot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yānaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A vehicle: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vayhaṁ ratho sakaṭaṁ sandamānikā sivikā pāṭaṅkī.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a wagon, a carriage, a cart, a chariot, a palanquin, a litter. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāyeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Travels: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakimpi yānena yāyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she travels in a vehicle even once, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānā agilānasaññā yānena yāyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not sick, and she does not perceive herself as sick, and she travels in a vehicle, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānā vematikā yānena yāyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not sick, but she is unsure of it, and she travels in a vehicle, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānā gilānasaññā yānena yāyati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not sick, but she perceives herself as sick, and she travels in a vehicle, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā agilānasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is sick, but she does not perceive herself as sick, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is sick, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā gilānasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is sick, and she perceives herself as sick, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
