<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc91-93_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattupāhanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on sunshades and sandals </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">91–93. Sikkhamāna-sāmaṇerī-gihiniummaddāpanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">91–93. The training rules on having trainee nuns … novice nuns … female householders massage </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo sikkhamānāya ummaddāpentipi parimaddāpentipi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nuns were having trainee nuns …</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmaṇeriyā ummaddāpentipi parimaddāpentipi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… novice nuns …</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gihiniyā ummaddāpentipi parimaddāpentipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… female householders massage and rub them.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā vihāracārikaṁ āhiṇḍantā passitvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people walking about the dwellings saw this, they complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo gihiniyā ummaddāpessantipi parimaddāpessantipi, seyyathāpi gihiniyo kāmabhoginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns get female householders to massage and rub them? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe…  tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo gihiniyā ummaddāpessantipi parimaddāpessantipī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns get female householders to massage and rub them?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo gihiniyā ummaddāpentipi parimaddāpentipī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo gihiniyā ummaddāpessantipi parimaddāpessantipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī (sikkhamānāya …pe…  sāmaṇeriyā …pe… ) gihiniyā ummaddāpeyya vā parimaddāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun has (a trainee nun … a novice nun …) a female householder massage her or rub her, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhamānā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A trainee nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who has trained for two years in the six rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmaṇerī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A novice nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasasikkhāpadikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a female training in the ten training rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihinī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A female householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">agārinī vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a female who lives in a house is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ummaddāpeyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has her massage her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummaddāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gets her to massage her, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parimaddāpeyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has her rub her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sambāhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gets her to rub her, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhama-navama-dasamasikkhāpadāni niṭṭhitāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tenth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
