<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc65_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gabbhinivagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pregnant women </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">65. Gihigatasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">65. The training rule on married girls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo ūnadvādasavassaṁ gihigataṁ vuṭṭhāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nuns were giving the full admission to married girls less than twelve years old. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā akkhamā honti sītassa uṇhassa jighacchāya pipāsāya ḍaṁsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassānaṁ duruttānaṁ durāgatānaṁ vacanapathānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They were unable to endure cold and heat; hunger and thirst; contact with horseflies, mosquitoes, wind, the burning sun, and creeping animals and insects; rude and unwelcome speech; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannānaṁ sārīrikānaṁ vedanānaṁ dukkhānaṁ tibbānaṁ kharānaṁ kaṭukānaṁ asātānaṁ amanāpānaṁ pāṇaharānaṁ anadhivāsakajātikā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they were unable to bear up with bodily feelings that are painful, severe, sharp, and destructive of life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo ūnadvādasavassaṁ gihigataṁ vuṭṭhāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns give the full admission to married girls less than twelve years old?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo ūnadvādasavassaṁ gihigataṁ vuṭṭhāpentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo ūnadvādasavassaṁ gihigataṁ vuṭṭhāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnadvādasavassā, bhikkhave, gihigatā akkhamā hoti sītassa uṇhassa jighacchāya pipāsāya ḍaṁsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassānaṁ duruttānaṁ durāgatānaṁ vacanapathānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A married girl less than twelve years old is unable to endure cold and heat; hunger and thirst; contact with horseflies, mosquitoes, wind, the burning sun, and creeping animals and insects; rude and unwelcome speech; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannānaṁ sārīrikānaṁ vedanānaṁ dukkhānaṁ tibbānaṁ kharānaṁ kaṭukānaṁ asātānaṁ amanāpānaṁ pāṇaharānaṁ anadhivāsakajātikā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and she’s unable to bear up with bodily feelings that are painful, severe, sharp, and destructive of life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvādasavassāva kho, bhikkhave, gihigatā khamā hoti sītassa uṇhassa jighacchāya pipāsāya ḍaṁsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassānaṁ duruttānaṁ durāgatānaṁ vacanapathānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But a married girl who is twelve years old is able to endure these things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uppannānaṁ sārīrikānaṁ vedanānaṁ dukkhānaṁ tibbānaṁ kharānaṁ kaṭukānaṁ asātānaṁ amanāpānaṁ pāṇaharānaṁ adhivāsakajātikā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī ūnadvādasavassaṁ gihigataṁ vuṭṭhāpeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun gives the full admission to a married girl who is less than twelve years old, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnadvādasavassā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is less than twelve years old: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">appattadvādasavassā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who has not reached twelve years of age. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihigatā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A married girl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">purisantaragatā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who has gone to the place of a man is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives the full admission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampādeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gives the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vuṭṭhāpessāmī”ti gaṇaṁ vā ācariniṁ vā pattaṁ vā cīvaraṁ vā pariyesati, sīmaṁ vā sammannati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If, intending to give the full admission, she searches for a group, a teacher, a bowl, or a robe, or she establishes a monastic boundary, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñattiyā dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the motion, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvīhi kammavācāhi dukkaṭā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After each of the first two announcements, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kammavācāpariyosāne upajjhāyāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last announcement is finished, the preceptor commits an offense entailing confession, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇassa ca ācariniyā ca āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the group and the teacher commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnadvādasavassāya ūnadvādasavassasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the girl is less than twelve years old, and she perceives her as less, and she gives her the full admission, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnadvādasavassāya vematikā vuṭṭhāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the girl is less than twelve years old, but she is unsure of it, and she gives her the full admission, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnadvādasavassāya paripuṇṇasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the girl is less than twelve years old, but she perceives her as more, and she gives her the full admission, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripuṇṇadvādasavassāya ūnadvādasavassasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the girl is more than twelve years old, but she perceives her as less, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripuṇṇadvādasavassāya vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the girl is more than twelve years old, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paripuṇṇadvādasavassāya paripuṇṇasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the girl is more than twelve years old, and she perceives her as more, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnadvādasavassaṁ paripuṇṇasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives the full admission to a girl less than twelve years old, but she perceives her as more; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paripuṇṇadvādasavassaṁ paripuṇṇasaññā vuṭṭhāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives the full admission to a girl more than twelve years old, and she perceives her as more; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
