<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc54_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on monasteries </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">54. Pavāritasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">54. The training rule on inviting </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro brāhmaṇo bhikkhuniyo nimantetvā bhojesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain brahmin had invited the nuns for a meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo bhuttāvī pavāritā ñātikulāni gantvā ekaccā bhuñjiṁsu ekaccā piṇḍapātaṁ ādāya agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the nuns had finished and refused an invitation to eat more, they went to their respective families, where some ate and others got almsfood and left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo paṭivissake etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards that brahmin said this to his neighbors, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhuniyo mayā, ayyā, santappitā, etha tumhepi santappessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have satisfied the nuns. Come, and I’ll satisfy you, too.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ tvaṁ, ayyo, amhe santappessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could you satisfy us? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāpi tayā nimantitā tāpi amhākaṁ gharāni āgantvā ekaccā bhuñjiṁsu ekaccā piṇḍapātaṁ ādāya agamaṁsū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those nuns who were invited by you came to our houses, where some ate and others got almsfood and left.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That brahmin complained and criticized those nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo amhākaṁ ghare bhuñjitvā aññatra bhuñjissanti, na cāhaṁ paṭibalo yāvadatthaṁ dātun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could they eat in our house and afterwards eat elsewhere? Am I not able to give them as much as they want?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tassa brāhmaṇassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of that brahmin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo bhuttāvī pavāritā aññatra bhuñjissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns finish their meal, refuse an invitation to eat more, and then eat elsewhere?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo bhuttāvī pavāritā aññatra bhuñjantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo bhuttāvī pavāritā aññatra bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns act in this way? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī nimantitā vā pavāritā vā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun, who has been invited to a meal, refuses an invitation to eat more, and then eats fresh or cooked food, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantitā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Refuses an offer to eat more: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcannaṁ bhojanānaṁ aññatarena bhojanena nimantitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">refuses an offer to eat any of the five cooked foods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pavāritā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Refuses an invitation to eat more: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asanaṁ paññāyati, bhojanaṁ paññāyati, hatthapāse ṭhitā abhiharati, paṭikkhepo paññāyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">eating is seen, cooked food is seen, it is offered by one standing within arm’s reach, a refusal is seen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni yāguṁ yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ ṭhapetvā</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods, rice porridge, the post-midday tonics, the seven-day tonics, and the lifetime tonics, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khādissāmi bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she receives it with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantite nimantitasaññā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has refused an offer, and she perceives that she has, and she eats fresh or cooked food, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantite vematikā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has refused an offer, but she is unsure of it, and she eats fresh or cooked food, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nimantite animantitasaññā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā khādati vā bhuñjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has refused an offer, but she does not perceive that she has, and she eats fresh or cooked food, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ āhāratthāya paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she receives post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics for the purpose of food, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti dukkaṭassa …pe….</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nimantitā appavāritā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she has refused an offer to eat more, but not an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāguṁ pivati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she drinks rice porridge; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāmike apaloketvā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she eats more after getting permission from the person who invited her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāmakālikaṁ sattāhakālikaṁ yāvajīvikaṁ sati paccaye paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, when there is a reason, she uses post-midday tonics, seven-day tonics, or lifetime tonics; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
