<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc4_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">4. Jatumaṭṭhakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">4. The training rule on dildos </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā purāṇarājorodhā bhikkhunīsu pabbajitā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a woman who had previously belonged to the king’s harem had gone forth as a nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatarā bhikkhunī anabhiratiyā pīḷitā yena sā bhikkhunī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Another nun who was plagued by lust went to that nun and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“rājā kho, ayye, tumhe cirāciraṁ gacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, the king only came to you at long intervals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ tumhe dhārethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How did you cope?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jatumaṭṭhakena, ayye”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“With a dildo.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kiṁ etaṁ, ayye, jatumaṭṭhakan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What’s a dildo?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī tassā bhikkhuniyā jatumaṭṭhakaṁ ācikkhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun described a dildo to her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī jatumaṭṭhakaṁ ādiyitvā dhovituṁ vissaritvā ekamantaṁ chaḍḍesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The other nun then used a dildo. But she forgot to wash it before disposing of it in a certain place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo makkhikāhi samparikiṇṇaṁ passitvā evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns saw it covered with flies, and they said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kassidaṁ kamman”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā evamāha— “mayhidaṁ kamman”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I did it,” she replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī jatumaṭṭhakaṁ ādiyissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun use a dildo?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī jatumaṭṭhakaṁ ādiyatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī jatumaṭṭhakaṁ ādiyissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun use a dildo? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Jatumaṭṭhake pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun uses a dildo, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jatumaṭṭhakaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A dildo: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jatumayaṁ kaṭṭhamayaṁ piṭṭhamayaṁ mattikāmayaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">made of resin, made of wood, made of flour, made of clay. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādiyeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Uses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samphassaṁ sādiyantī antamaso uppalapattampi muttakaraṇaṁ paveseti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she consents to the contact and inserts it into her vagina, even if it is just a lotus leaf, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ābādhapaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does it because she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fourth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
