<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc18_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattandhakāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the dark of the night </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">18. Paraujjhāpanakasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">18. The training rule on complaining about others </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhaddāya kāpilāniyā antevāsinī bhikkhunī bhaddaṁ kāpilāniṁ sakkaccaṁ upaṭṭheti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a nun who was a pupil of Bhaddā Kāpilānī attended on her with care. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaddā kāpilānī bhikkhuniyo etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bhaddā Kāpilānī said to the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ maṁ, ayye, bhikkhunī sakkaccaṁ upaṭṭheti, imissāhaṁ cīvaraṁ dassāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, this nun is attending on me with care. I’ll give her a robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī duggahitena dūpadhāritena paraṁ ujjhāpesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, because of misunderstanding and a lack of proper reflection, that nun complained about Bhaddā Kāpilānī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṁ kirāyye, ayyaṁ na sakkaccaṁ upaṭṭhemi, na kira me ayyā cīvaraṁ dassatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, if I didn’t attend on her with care, she wouldn’t give me a robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī duggahitena dūpadhāritena paraṁ ujjhāpessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun complain about someone else because of misunderstanding and a lack of proper reflection?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī duggahitena dūpadhāritena paraṁ ujjhāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī duggahitena dūpadhāritena paraṁ ujjhāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun act in this way? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī duggahitena dūpadhāritena paraṁ ujjhāpeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun complains about someone else because of misunderstanding and a lack of proper reflection, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duggahitenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of misunderstanding: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññathā gahitena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">because of wrong understanding. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dūpadhāritenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of a lack of proper reflection: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññathā upadhāritena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">because of wrong reflection. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paranti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannaṁ ujjhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she complains about one who is fully ordained, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññā ujjhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and she perceives them as such, and she complains about them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematikā ujjhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and she complains about them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññā ujjhāpeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she does not perceive them as such, and she complains about them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ ujjhāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she complains about someone who is not fully ordained, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she perceives them as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive them as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
