<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc7_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">7. Āmakadhaññasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">7. The training rule on raw grain </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo sassakāle āmakadhaññaṁ viññāpetvā nagaraṁ atiharanti dvāraṭṭhāne—</span></p>
<p class="p3">it was the harvest season. At that time the nuns had asked for raw grain, which they then carried to town. At the town gate they were detained and told, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dethāyye, bhāgan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, give a share.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Palibundhetvā muñciṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After being released, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo upassayaṁ gantvā bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they went to the nuns’ dwelling place and told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo āmakadhaññaṁ viññāpessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns ask for raw grain?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo āmakadhaññaṁ viññāpentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo āmakadhaññaṁ viññāpessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī āmakadhaññaṁ viññatvā vā viññāpetvā vā bhajjitvā vā bhajjāpetvā vā koṭṭetvā vā koṭṭāpetvā vā pacitvā vā pacāpetvā vā bhuñjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun asks for or has someone else ask for raw grain, or she roasts it or has it roasted, or she pounds it or has it pounded, or she cooks it or has it cooked, and she then eats it, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āmakadhaññaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Raw grain: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāli vīhi yavo godhumo kaṅgu varako kudrusako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">rice, barley, wheat, millet, wild gram, kodo millet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññatvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Asks for: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ viññatvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she asks herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Viññāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has someone ask for: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ viññāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she gets another to ask. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhajjitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Roasts: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ bhajjitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she roasts it herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhajjāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has it roasted: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ bhajjāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she gets someone else to roast it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Koṭṭetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pounds: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ koṭṭetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she pounds it herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Koṭṭāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has it pounded: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ koṭṭāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she gets someone else to pound it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ pacitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she cooks it herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has it cooked: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ pacāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she gets someone else to cook it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she accepts it with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ābādhapaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does it because she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aparaṇṇaṁ viññāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asks for vegetables; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
