<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc86_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattupāhanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on sunshades and sandals </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">86. Saṅghāṇisikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">86. The training rule on ornamentations of the hip </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī aññatarissā itthiyā kulūpikā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there was a nun was associating with the family of a certain woman. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā itthī taṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">That woman said to that nun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handāyye, imaṁ saṅghāṇiṁ amukāya nāma itthiyā dehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, please give this hip ornament to such-and-such a woman.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sacāhaṁ pattena ādāya gacchāmi vissaro me bhavissatī”ti paṭimuñcitvā agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If I carry it in my almsbowl, I’ll get into trouble,” and so she put it on and then left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassā rathikāya suttake chinne vippakiriyiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">While she was walking along a street the threads snapped and were scattered all over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo saṅghāṇiṁ dhāressanti, seyyathāpi gihiniyo kāmabhoginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns wear hip ornaments? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī saṅghāṇiṁ dhāressatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun wear a hip ornament?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī saṅghāṇiṁ dhāretī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī saṅghāṇiṁ dhāressati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī saṅghāṇiṁ dhāreyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun wears a hip ornament, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghāṇi nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A hip ornament: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci kaṭūpagā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever goes on the hip. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhāreyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Wears: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakimpi dhāreti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she wears it even once, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ābādhappaccayā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she wears it because she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṭisuttakaṁ dhāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she wears a girdle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
