<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc56_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on monasteries </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">56. Abhikkhukāvāsasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">56. The training rule on monasteries without monks </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhuniyo gāmakāvāse vassaṁvuṭṭhā sāvatthiṁ agamaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a number of nuns who had completed the rainy-season residence in a village monastery went to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo tā bhikkhuniyo etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns there asked them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“katthāyyāyo vassaṁvuṭṭhā?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, where did you spend the rains residence? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kacci ovādo iddho ahosī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">We hope the instruction was effective?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthayye, tattha bhikkhū;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“There were no monks there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuto ovādo iddho bhavissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">So how could the instruction be effective?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo abhikkhuke āvāse vassaṁ vasissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns spend the rains residence in a monastery without monks?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo abhikkhuke āvāse vassaṁ vasantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo abhikkhuke āvāse vassaṁ vasissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī abhikkhuke āvāse vassaṁ vaseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun spends the rainy-season residence in a monastery without monks, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhikkhuko nāma āvāso</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monastery without monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti ovādāya vā saṁvāsāya vā gantuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she is not able to go to the instruction or to formal meetings of the community. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vassaṁ vasissāmī”ti senāsanaṁ paññapeti pānīyaṁ paribhojanīyaṁ upaṭṭhapeti pariveṇaṁ sammajjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she thinks, “I’ll stay here for the rainy-season residence,” and she prepares a dwelling, sets out water for drinking and water for washing, and sweeps the precincts, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saha aruṇuggamanā āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At dawn, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vassupagatā bhikkhū pakkantā vā honti vibbhantā vā kālaṅkatā vā pakkhasaṅkantā vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the monks who entered the rainy-season residence there depart or disrobe or die or join another faction; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
