<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc78_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kumāribhūtavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on unmarried girls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">78. Dutiyasikkhamāna-navuṭṭhāpanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">78. The second training rule on not giving the full admission to trainee nuns </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā sikkhamānā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ upasaṅkamitvā upasampadaṁ yāci.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a trainee nun went to the nun Thullanandā and asked for the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī taṁ sikkhamānaṁ “sace maṁ tvaṁ, ayye, dve vassāni anubandhissasi evāhaṁ taṁ vuṭṭhāpessāmī”ti vatvā, neva vuṭṭhāpeti na vuṭṭhāpanāya ussukkaṁ karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā told her, “If you follow me for two years, Venerable, I’ll give you the full admission.” But she neither gave her the full admission nor made any effort to have her fully admitted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā sikkhamānā bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That trainee nun told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā sikkhamānaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā say this to a trainee nun, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace maṁ tvaṁ, ayye, dve vassāni anubandhissasi evāhaṁ taṁ vuṭṭhāpessāmī’ti vatvā, neva vuṭṭhāpessati na vuṭṭhāpanāya ussukkaṁ karissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">but then neither give her the full admission nor make any effort to have her fully admitted?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī sikkhamānaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace maṁ tvaṁ, ayye, dve vassāni anubandhissasi evāhaṁ taṁ vuṭṭhāpessāmī’ti vatvā, neva vuṭṭhāpeti na vuṭṭhāpanāya ussukkaṁ karotī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī sikkhamānaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā act in this way? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘sace maṁ tvaṁ, ayye, dve vassāni anubandhissasi evāhaṁ taṁ vuṭṭhāpessāmī’ti vatvā, neva vuṭṭhāpessati na vuṭṭhāpanāya ussukkaṁ karissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī sikkhamānaṁ— ‘sace maṁ tvaṁ, ayye, dve vassāni anubandhissasi evāhaṁ taṁ vuṭṭhāpessāmī’ti vatvā, sā pacchā anantarāyikinī neva vuṭṭhāpeyya na vuṭṭhāpanāya ussukkaṁ kareyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun tells a trainee nun, “If you follow me for two years, Venerable, I’ll give you the full admission,” but she then neither gives her the full admission nor makes any effort to have her fully admitted, then, if there was no obstruction, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sikkhamānā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A trainee nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve vassāni chasu dhammesu sikkhitasikkhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who has trained for two years in the six rules. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace maṁ tvaṁ, ayye, dve vassāni anubandhissasīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If you follow me for two years, Venerable”: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve saṁvaccharāni upaṭṭhahissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if you attend on me for two twelve-month periods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evāhaṁ taṁ vuṭṭhāpessāmīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ll give you the full admission”: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evāhaṁ taṁ upasampādessāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ll give you the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā pacchā anantarāyikinīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, if there was no obstruction: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asati antarāye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when there is no obstacle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva vuṭṭhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">She neither gives her the full admission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sayaṁ vuṭṭhāpeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not herself give her the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na vuṭṭhāpanāya ussukkaṁ kareyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor makes any effort to have her fully admitted: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññaṁ āṇāpeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not ask anyone else to give her the full admission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Neva vuṭṭhāpessāmi na vuṭṭhāpanāya ussukkaṁ karissāmī”ti dhuraṁ nikkhittamatte āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she thinks, “I’ll neither give her the full admission nor make any effort to have her fully admitted,” then by the mere fact of giving up her duty, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati antarāye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is an obstacle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesitvā na labhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she searches for someone to give her the full ordination, but is unable to find anyone; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
