<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc1_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">1. Lasuṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">1. The training rule on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime kho panāyyāyo chasaṭṭhisatā pācittiyā dhammā uddesaṁ āgacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerables, these one hundred and sixty-six rules on offenses entailing confession come up for recitation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarena upāsakena bhikkhunisaṅgho lasuṇena pavārito hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a lay follower had invited the Sangha of nuns to ask for garlic: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāsaṁ ayyānaṁ lasuṇena attho, ahaṁ lasuṇenā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If any of the nuns need garlic, I’ll supply it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettapālo ca āṇatto hoti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he had told his field-keeper, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace bhikkhuniyo āgacchanti, ekamekāya bhikkhuniyā dvetayo bhaṇḍike dehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If the nuns come, give two or three bulbs to each nun.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṁ ussavo hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On that occasion they were holding a celebration in Sāvatthī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathābhataṁ lasuṇaṁ parikkhayaṁ agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the garlic was used up as soon as it arrived there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo taṁ upāsakaṁ upasaṅkamitvā etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the nuns went to that lay follower and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“lasuṇena, āvuso, attho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We need garlic.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Natthāyye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, there isn’t any. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yathābhataṁ lasuṇaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As soon as the garlic arrives, it’s used up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettaṁ gacchathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please go to the field.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī khettaṁ gantvā na mattaṁ jānitvā bahuṁ lasuṇaṁ harāpesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun Thullanandā went to the field, and not having any sense of moderation she took a large amount of garlic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khettapālo ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The field-keeper complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo na mattaṁ jānitvā bahuṁ lasuṇaṁ harāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns not have any sense of moderation and take a large amount of garlic?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tassa khettapālassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of that field-keeper, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā na mattaṁ jānitvā bahuṁ lasuṇaṁ harāpessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā not have any sense of moderation and take a large amount of garlic?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī na mattaṁ jānitvā bahuṁ lasuṇaṁ harāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī na mattaṁ jānitvā bahuṁ lasuṇaṁ harāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā not have any sense of moderation and take a large amount of garlic? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and after giving a teaching he addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhūtapubbaṁ, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī aññatarassa brāhmaṇassa pajāpati ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Once upon a time, monks, Thullanandā was the wife of a brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tisso ca dhītaro—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They had three daughters, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nandā, nandavatī, sundarīnandā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nandā, Nandavatī, and Sundarīnandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, so brāhmaṇo kālaṁ katvā aññataraṁ haṁsayoniṁ upapajji.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When that brahmin eventually died, he was reborn as a goose, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa sabbasovaṇṇamayā pattā ahesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whose feathers were all made of gold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tāsaṁ ekekaṁ pattaṁ deti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he gave his former family members one feather at the time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī ‘ayaṁ haṁso amhākaṁ ekekaṁ pattaṁ detī’ti taṁ haṁsarājaṁ gahetvā nippattaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā considered this. She then grabbed hold of that king of geese and plucked him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa puna jāyamānā pattā setā sampajjiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But when his feathers regrew they were white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tadāpi, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī atilobhena suvaṇṇā parihīnā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time too, monks, Thullanandā lost her gold because she was too greedy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idāni lasuṇā parihāyissatīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now she will lose her garlic.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ laddhaṁ tena tuṭṭhabbaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“One should be content with what one gets, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atilobho hi pāpako;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because excessive greed is bad. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Haṁsarājaṁ gahetvāna,</span></p>
<p class="p3">After grabbing hold of the king of geese, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suvaṇṇā parihāyathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The gold came to an end.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā dubbharatāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, after criticizing the nun Thullanandā in many ways, the Buddha spoke in dispraise of being difficult to support … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī lasuṇaṁ khādeyya pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun eats garlic, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Garlic: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">māgadhakaṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from Magadha is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khādissāmīti paṭiggaṇhā”ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she receives it with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇe lasuṇasaññā khādati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is garlic and she perceives it as such, and she eats it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇe vematikā khādati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is garlic, but she is unsure of it, and she eats it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇe alasuṇasaññā khādati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is garlic, but she does not perceive it as such, and she eats it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alasuṇe lasuṇasaññā khādati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not garlic, but she perceives it as such, and she eats it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alasuṇe vematikā khādati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not garlic, but she is unsure of it, and she eats it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Alasuṇe alasuṇasaññā khādati, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not garlic and she does not perceive it as such, and she eats it, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">palaṇḍuke,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is an onion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhañjanake,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a shallot; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">harītake,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is chebulic myrobalan; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cāpalasuṇe,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a spring onion; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sūpasampāke,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is cooked in a bean curry; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maṁsasampāke,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is cooked with meat; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">telasampāke,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is cooked with oil; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāḷave,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is in sweets; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uttaribhaṅge,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a special curry; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇasikkhāpadaṁ paṭhamaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on garlic, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
