<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc19_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattandhakāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the dark of the night </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">19. Paraabhisapanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">19. The training rule on cursing another </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo attano bhaṇḍakaṁ apassantiyo caṇḍakāḷiṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">some nuns were unable to find their possessions. They said to the nun Caṇḍakāḷī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“apāyye, amhākaṁ bhaṇḍakaṁ passeyyāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, have you seen our things?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Caṇḍakāḷī complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahameva nūna corī, ahameva nūna alajjinī, yā ayyāyo attano bhaṇḍakaṁ apassantiyo tā maṁ evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Why are you asking me if I’ve seen your things? Am I a thief? Am I shameless? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘apāyye, amhākaṁ bhaṇḍakaṁ passeyyāsī’ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacāhaṁ, ayye, tumhākaṁ bhaṇḍakaṁ gaṇhāmi, assamaṇī homi, brahmacariyā cavāmi, nirayaṁ upapajjāmi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerables, if I took your things I wouldn’t be a monastic anymore. I would fall from the spiritual life and be reborn in hell. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā pana maṁ abhūtena evamāha sāpi assamaṇī hotu, brahmacariyā cavatu, nirayaṁ upapajjatū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">May anyone who speaks such an untruth about me depart from monasticism, fall from the spiritual life, and be reborn in hell!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā caṇḍakāḷī attānampi parampi nirayenapi brahmacariyenapi abhisapissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Caṇḍakāḷī invoke hell and the spiritual life to curse herself and others?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī attānampi parampi nirayenapi brahmacariyenapi abhisapatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Caṇḍakāḷī did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī attānampi parampi nirayenapi brahmacariyenapi abhisapissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Caṇḍakāḷī act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī attānaṁ vā paraṁ vā nirayena vā brahmacariyena vā abhisapeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun invokes hell or the spiritual life to curse herself or someone else, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attānanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Herself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paccattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">oneself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paranti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Someone else: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who is fully ordained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nirayena vā brahmacariyena vā abhisapati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she invokes hell or the spiritual life as a curse, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññā nirayena vā brahmacariyena vā abhisapati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and she perceives them as such, and she invokes hell or the spiritual life to curse them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematikā nirayena vā brahmacariyena vā abhisapati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and she invokes hell or the spiritual life to curse them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññā nirayena vā brahmacariyena vā abhisapati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she does not perceive them as such, and she invokes hell or the spiritual life to curse them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiracchānayoniyā vā pettivisayena vā manussadobhaggena vā abhisapati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she invokes the animal realm, the ghost realm, or human misfortune as a curse, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ abhisapati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she curses someone who is not fully ordained, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she perceives them as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive them as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthapurekkhārāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is aiming at what is beneficial; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammapurekkhārāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is aiming at giving a teaching; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anusāsanipurekkhārāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is aiming at giving an instruction; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ninth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
