<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc68_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gabbhinivagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pregnant women </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">68. Sahajīvinīsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">68. The training rule on disciples </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā dve vassāni neva anuggaṇhāti na anuggaṇhāpeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā gave the full admission to her disciples, but then, for the next two years, neither guided them nor had them guided. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā bālā honti abyattā;</span></p>
<p class="p3">They were ignorant and incompetent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na jānanti kappiyaṁ vā akappiyaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they did not know what was allowable and what was not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā dve vassāni neva anuggaṇhissati na anuggaṇhāpessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Thullanandā give the full admission to her disciples, and then neither guide them nor have them guided for two years?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā dve vassāni neva anuggaṇhāti na anuggaṇhāpetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā does this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā dve vassāni neva anuggaṇhissati na anuggaṇhāpessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā dve vassāni neva anuggaṇheyya na anuggaṇhāpeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun gives the full admission to her disciple, and then, for the next two years, neither guides her nor has her guided, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahajīvinī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Disciple: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhivihārinī vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">student is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives the full admission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampādetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gives the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve vassānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two years: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dve saṁvaccharāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">two twelve-month periods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva anuggaṇheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Neither guides her: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sayaṁ anuggaṇheyya uddesena paripucchāya ovādena anusāsaniyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not herself guide her—through recitation, through questioning, through instruction, though teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na anuggaṇhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor has her guided: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññaṁ āṇāpeyya</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not ask anyone else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dve vassāni neva anuggaṇhissāmi na anuggaṇhāpessāmī”ti dhuraṁ nikkhittamatte āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she thinks, “I’ll neither guide her nor have her guided for two years,” then by the mere fact of giving up her duty, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati antarāye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is an obstacle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesitvā na labhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she searches for someone to guide her, but cannot find anyone; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
