<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc27_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">27. Paṭibāhanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">27. The training rule on blocking </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhunisaṅghassa akālacīvaraṁ uppannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time out-of-season robe-cloth had been given to the Sangha of nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhikkhunisaṅgho taṁ cīvaraṁ bhājetukāmo sannipati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the Sangha gathered to share it out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā antevāsiniyo bhikkhuniyo pakkantā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the nuns who were pupils of the nun Thullanandā were away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī tā bhikkhuniyo etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā said to the nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayye, bhikkhuniyo pakkantā, na tāva cīvaraṁ bhājīyissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, there are nuns who are away. We cannot distribute the robe-cloth until they get back.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaravibhaṅgaṁ paṭibāhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she blocked the distribution of robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo na tāva cīvaraṁ bhājīyissatīti pakkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Since the robe-cloth could not be distributed until those nuns returned, other nuns left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī antevāsinīsu bhikkhunīsu āgatāsu taṁ cīvaraṁ bhājāpesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, when her pupils returned, Thullanandā had that robe-cloth distributed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā dhammikaṁ cīvaravibhaṅgaṁ paṭibāhissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā block a legitimate distribution of robe-cloth?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī dhammikaṁ cīvaravibhaṅgaṁ paṭibāhatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī dhammikaṁ cīvaravibhaṅgaṁ paṭibāhissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī dhammikaṁ cīvaravibhaṅgaṁ paṭibāheyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun blocks a legitimate distribution of robe-cloth, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammiko nāma cīvaravibhaṅgo</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legitimate distribution of robe-cloth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaggo bhikkhunisaṅgho sannipatitvā bhājeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is distributed by a unanimous Sangha of nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭibāheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Blocks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathaṁ imaṁ cīvaraṁ na bhājeyyāti paṭibāhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she blocks it with the thought, “What can be done so that this robe-cloth isn’t distributed?”, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammike dhammikasaññā paṭibāhati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, and she blocks it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammike vematikā paṭibāhati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, and she blocks it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammike adhammikasaññā paṭibāhati, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is a legitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as illegitimate, and she blocks it, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammike dhammikasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she perceives it as legitimate, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammike vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhammike adhammikasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an illegitimate legal procedure, and she perceives it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ānisaṁsaṁ dassetvā paṭibāhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she blocks it after demonstrating a benefit; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
