<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc17_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattandhakāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the dark of the night </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">17. Anāpucchāsantharaṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">17. The training rule on spreading out without asking permission </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery.  </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhuniyo kosalesu janapade sāvatthiṁ gacchantiyo sāyaṁ aññataraṁ gāmaṁ upagantvā aññataraṁ brāhmaṇakulaṁ upasaṅkamitvā okāsaṁ yāciṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a number of nuns were traveling through the Kosalan country on their way to Sāvatthī, when one evening they arrived at a certain village. There they went to a brahmin family and asked for a place to stay. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā brāhmaṇī tā bhikkhuniyo etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The brahmin woman told them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgametha, ayye, yāva brāhmaṇo āgacchatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please wait, Venerables, until my husband returns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“yāva brāhmaṇo āgacchatī”ti seyyaṁ santharitvā ekaccā nisīdiṁsu ekaccā nipajjiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">While they were waiting, the nuns put out bedding, and some sat down on it while others lay down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo rattiṁ āgantvā taṁ brāhmaṇiṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the husband returned at night, he said to his wife, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kā imā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Who are they?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhuniyo, ayyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They are nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Nikkaḍḍhatha imā muṇḍā bandhakiniyo”ti, gharato nikkaḍḍhāpesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Throw out these shaven-headed sluts!”, and he had them thrown out of the house. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho tā bhikkhuniyo sāvatthiṁ gantvā bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Those nuns then went to Sāvatthī, where they told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo vikāle kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā seyyaṁ santharitvā abhinisīdissantipi abhinipajjissantipī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns visit families at the wrong time, put out bedding without asking permission of the owners, and then sit down and lie down on it?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo vikāle kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā seyyaṁ santharitvā abhinisīdantipi abhinipajjantipī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo vikāle kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā seyyaṁ santharitvā abhinisīdissantipi abhinipajjissantipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could nuns act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī vikāle kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā abhinisīdeyya vā abhinipajjeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun visits families at the wrong time, puts out bedding without asking permission of the owners, or has it put out, and then sits down or lies down on it, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vikālo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The wrong time: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthaṅgate sūriye yāva aruṇuggamanā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from sunset until dawn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A family: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri kulāni— khattiyakulaṁ, brāhmaṇakulaṁ, vessakulaṁ suddakulaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of families: the aristocratic family, the brahmin family, the merchant family, the worker family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasaṅkamitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Visits: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha gantvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">goes there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmike anāpucchāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without asking permission of the owners: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo tasmiṁ kule manusso sāmiko dātuṁ, taṁ anāpucchā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">not having asked permission of a person in that family who is an owner and who has the authority to give. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bedding: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antamaso paṇṇasanthāropi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">even a spread of leaves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santharitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Puts out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ santharitvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she puts it out herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santharāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has it put out: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ santharāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has someone else to put it out. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinisīdeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sits down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ abhinisīdati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she sits down on it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinipajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lies down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ abhinipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she lies down on it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite anāpucchitasaññā seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, and she does not perceive that she has, and she sits down or lies down on bedding after putting it out or having it put out, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite vematikā seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, but she is unsure of it, and she sits down or lies down on bedding after putting it out or having it put out, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite āpucchitasaññā seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, but she perceives that she has, and she sits down or lies down on bedding after putting it out or having it put out, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite anāpucchitasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, but she does not perceive that she has, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite āpucchitasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, and she perceives that she has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpucchā seyyaṁ santharitvā vā santharāpetvā vā abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she first asks permission, and then, after putting out bedding or having it put out, sits down or lies down on it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
