<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc33_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuvaṭṭavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying down </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">33. Aphāsukaraṇasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">33. The training rule on making ill at ease </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī bahussutā hoti bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā was a learned reciter, and she was confident and skilled at giving teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhaddāpi kāpilānī bahussutā hoti bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ uḷārasambhāvitā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Bhaddā Kāpilānī, too, was a learned reciter who was confident and skilled at giving teachings, and she was respected for her excellence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyā bhaddā kāpilānī bahussutā bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ uḷārasambhāvitā”ti bhaddaṁ kāpilāniṁ paṭhamaṁ payirupāsitvā, pacchā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ payirupāsanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of this, people visited Bhaddā Kāpilānī first and then Thullanandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī issāpakatā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Overcome by jealousy, Thullanandā thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imā kira appicchā santuṭṭhā pavivittā asaṁsaṭṭhā yā imā saññattibahulā viññattibahulā viharantī”ti bhaddāya kāpilāniyā purato caṅkamatipi tiṭṭhatipi nisīdatipi seyyampi kappeti uddisatipi uddisāpetipi sajjhāyampi karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These ones, who are supposedly contented and have few desires, who are supposedly secluded and not socializing, are always persuading and convincing people.” And in front of Bhaddā Kāpilānī, she walked back and forth, stood, sat down, and lay down, and she recited and had others recite, and she rehearsed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā ayyāya bhaddāya kāpilāniyā sañcicca aphāsuṁ karissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā intentionally make Bhaddā Kāpilānī ill at ease?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhaddāya kāpilāniyā sañcicca aphāsuṁ karotī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhaddāya kāpilāniyā sañcicca aphāsuṁ karissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā sañcicca aphāsuṁ kareyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun intentionally makes a nun ill at ease, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāya bhikkhuniyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sañciccāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Intentionally: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jānantī sañjānantī cecca abhivitaritvā vītikkamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">knowing, perceiving, having intended, having decided, she transgresses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aphāsuṁ kareyyāti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Makes ill at ease: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“iminā imissā aphāsu bhavissatī”ti anāpucchā purato caṅkamati vā tiṭṭhati vā nisīdati vā seyyaṁ vā kappeti uddisati vā uddisāpeti vā sajjhāyaṁ vā karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, without asking permission, but thinking, “In this way she will be ill at ease,” she walks back and forth in front of her, or she stands, sits down, or lies down in front of her, or she recites, has others recite, or rehearses in front of her, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññā sañcicca aphāsuṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and she perceives her as such, and she intentionally makes her ill at ease, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematikā sañcicca aphāsuṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and she intentionally makes her ill at ease, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññā sañcicca aphāsuṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she does not perceive her as such, and she intentionally makes her ill at ease, she commits an offense entailing confession.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya sañcicca aphāsuṁ karoti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she intentionally makes her ill at ease, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she perceives her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aphāsuṁ kattukāmā āpucchā purato caṅkamati vā tiṭṭhati vā nisīdati vā seyyaṁ vā kappeti uddisati vā uddisāpeti vā sajjhāyaṁ vā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, after asking permission and not desiring to make her ill at ease, she walks back and forth in front of her, or she stands, sits down, or lies down in front of her, or she recites, has others recite, or rehearses in front of her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
