<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc23_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">23. Cīvarasibbanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">23. The training rule on sewing robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarissā bhikkhuniyā mahagghe cīvaradusse cīvaraṁ dukkaṭaṁ hoti dussibbitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time a robe belonging to a certain nun had been badly made and badly sewn from expensive robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī taṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nun Thullanandā said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sundaraṁ kho idaṁ te, ayye, cīvaradussaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, this robe-cloth is beautiful, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvarañca kho dukkaṭaṁ dussibbitan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the robe has been badly made and badly sewn.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Visibbemi, ayye, sibbissasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If I unstitch it, will you sew it back together?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āmāyye, sibbissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sure.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī taṁ cīvaraṁ visibbetvā thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā adāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that nun unstitched the robe and gave it to Thullanandā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet although Thullanandā </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sibbissāmi sibbissāmī”ti neva sibbati na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">repeatedly said she would sew it, she neither sewed it herself nor did she make any effort to have someone else do it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That nun then told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized Thullanandā, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ visibbāpetvā neva sibbissati na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā have a nun’s robe unstitched, and then neither sew it herself nor make any effort to have someone else do it?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ visibbāpetvā neva sibbati na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karotī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ visibbāpetvā neva sibbissati na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī bhikkhuniyā cīvaraṁ visibbetvā vā visibbāpetvā vā sā pacchā anantarāyikinī neva sibbeyya na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ kareyya, aññatra catūhapañcāhā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun, after unstitching a nun’s robe or having it unstitched, neither sews it herself nor makes any effort to have someone else sew it, then, if there was no obstruction or it was no more than four or five days, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A nun’s: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññāya bhikkhuniyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another nun’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visibbetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unstitching: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ visibbetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she unstitches it herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Visibbāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Having it unstitched: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ visibbāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she has someone else unstitch it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sā pacchā anantarāyikinīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then, if there was no obstruction: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">asati antarāye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when there is no obstacle. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva sibbeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">She neither sews: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sayaṁ sibbeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not sew it herself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ kareyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor makes any effort to have someone else sew it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññaṁ āṇāpeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not ask anyone else. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra catūhapañcāhāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">It was no more than four or five days: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā catūhapañcāhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless it was no more than four or five days. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Neva sibbissāmi na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karissāmī”ti dhuraṁ nikkhittamatte āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she thinks, “I’ll neither sew it nor make any effort to have someone else sew it,” then by the mere fact of giving up her duty, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya upasampannasaññā cīvaraṁ visibbetvā vā visibbāpetvā vā sā pacchā anantarāyikinī neva sibbati na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karoti, aññatra catūhapañcāhā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, and she perceives her as such, and she unstitches her robe or has it unstitched, and then neither sews it herself nor makes any effort to have someone else sew it, then, except if she was obstructed or it was no more than four or five days, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya vematikā cīvaraṁ visibbetvā vā visibbāpetvā vā sā pacchā anantarāyikinī neva sibbati na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karoti, aññatra catūhapañcāhā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and she unstitches her robe or has it unstitched, and then neither sews it herself nor makes any effort to have someone else sew it, then, except if she was obstructed or it was no more than four or five days, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampannāya anupasampannasaññā cīvaraṁ visibbetvā vā visibbāpetvā vā sā pacchā anantarāyikinī neva sibbati na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karoti, aññatra catūhapañcāhā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is fully ordained, but she does not perceive her as such, and she unstitches her robe or has it unstitched, and then neither sews it herself nor makes any effort to have someone else sew it, then, except if she was obstructed or it was no more than four or five days, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ parikkhāraṁ visibbetvā vā visibbāpetvā vā sā pacchā anantarāyikinī neva sibbati na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karoti, aññatra catūhapañcāhā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she unstitches another requisite or has it unstitched, and then neither sews it herself nor makes any effort to have someone else sew it, then, except if she was obstructed or it was no more than four or five days, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya cīvaraṁ vā aññaṁ vā parikkhāraṁ visibbetvā vā visibbāpetvā vā sā pacchā anantarāyikinī neva sibbati na sibbāpanāya ussukkaṁ karoti, aññatra catūhapañcāhā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she unstitches her robe or another requisite, or has it unstitched, and then neither sews it herself nor makes any effort to have someone else sew it, then, except if she was obstructed or it was no more than four or five days, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she perceives her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannāya anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the other person is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive her as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati antarāye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is an obstacle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesitvā na labhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she searches for someone to sew, but does not find anyone; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karontī catūhapañcāhaṁ atikkāmeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is doing it, but she goes beyond four or five days; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
