<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc8_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lasuṇavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on garlic </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">8. Uccārachaḍḍanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">8. The training rule on disposing of feces </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro brāhmaṇo nibbiṭṭharājabhaṭo “taññeva bhaṭapathaṁ yācissāmī”ti sīsaṁ nahāyitvā bhikkhunupassayaṁ nissāya rājakulaṁ gacchati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a brahmin who had earned money by working for the king thought, “I’ll ask for my wages.” After washing his hair, he walked past the nuns’ dwelling place on his way to the king’s residence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatarā bhikkhunī kaṭāhe vaccaṁ katvā tirokuṭṭe chaḍḍentī tassa brāhmaṇassa matthake āsumbhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then, after defecating in a pot, a nun disposed of the feces over a wall, and it landed on the head of that brahmin. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He complained and criticized the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇiyo imā muṇḍā bandhakiniyo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They’re not monastics these shaven-headed sluts! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathañhi nāma gūthakaṭāhaṁ matthake āsumbhissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">How can they dump shit on my head? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṁ upassayaṁ jhāpessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m gonna burn down their dwelling place!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ummukaṁ gahetvā upassayaṁ pavisati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he got hold of a firebrand and entered their dwelling place. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññataro upāsako upassayā nikkhamanto addasa taṁ brāhmaṇaṁ ummukaṁ gahetvā upassayaṁ pavisantaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then a lay follower who was coming out from the nuns’ dwelling place saw that brahmin with a firebrand on his way in, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna taṁ brāhmaṇaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, bho, ummukaṁ gahetvā upassayaṁ pavisasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, why are you entering the nuns’ dwelling place with a firebrand?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imā maṁ, bho, muṇḍā bandhakiniyo gūthakaṭāhaṁ matthake āsumbhiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“These shaven-headed sluts dumped shit on my head. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāsaṁ upassayaṁ jhāpessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m gonna burn down their dwelling place!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Gaccha, bho brāhmaṇa, maṅgalaṁ etaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But this is auspicious, brahmin! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahassaṁ lacchasi tañca bhaṭapathan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ll get your wages and a thousand coins in addition.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so brāhmaṇo sīsaṁ nahāyitvā rājakulaṁ gantvā sahassaṁ alattha tañca bhaṭapathaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">That brahmin then washed his hair, went to the king’s residence, and he got his wages and a thousand coins in addition. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so upāsako upassayaṁ pavisitvā bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocetvā paribhāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But that lay follower returned to the nuns’ dwelling place, told them what had happened, and then scolded them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo uccāraṁ tirokuṭṭe chaḍḍessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns dispose of feces over a wall?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo uccāraṁ tirokuṭṭe chaḍḍentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo uccāraṁ tirokuṭṭe chaḍḍessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns dispose of feces over a wall? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī uccāraṁ vā passāvaṁ vā saṅkāraṁ vā vighāsaṁ vā tirokuṭṭe vā tiropākāre vā chaḍḍeyya vā chaḍḍāpeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun disposes of feces or urine or trash or food scraps over a wall or over an encircling wall, or she has it disposed of in this way, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uccāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Feces: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gūtho vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">excrement is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Passāvo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Urine: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">muttaṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">pee is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅkāraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Trash: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kacavaraṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">refuse is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vighāsaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Food scraps: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">calakāni vā aṭṭhikāni vā ucchiṭṭhodakaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">food remnants or bones or used water. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kuṭṭo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A wall: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tayo kuṭṭā— iṭṭhakākuṭṭo, silākuṭṭo, dārukuṭṭo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are three kinds of walls: walls made of bricks, walls made of stone, walls made of wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pākāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An encircling wall: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tayo pākārā— iṭṭhakāpākāro, silāpākāro, dārupākāro.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are three kinds of encircling walls: encircling walls made of bricks, encircling walls made of stone, encircling walls made of wood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tirokuṭṭeti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Over a wall: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kuṭṭassa parato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to the other side of the wall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiropākāreti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Over an encircling wall: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pākārassa parato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to the other side of the encircling wall. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaḍḍeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Disposes of: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ chaḍḍeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she disposes of it herself, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaḍḍāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has it disposed of: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asks another, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sakiṁ āṇattā bahukampi chaḍḍeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she only asks once, then even if the other disposes of such things many times, she commits one offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">oloketvā chaḍḍeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she disposes of it after having looked; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avaḷañje chaḍḍeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she disposes of it at a place where no one passes by; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
