<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc29_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">29. Kālaatikkamanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">29. The training rule on letting the time expire </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā upaṭṭhākakulaṁ thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">a family that was supporting the nun Thullanandā said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace mayaṁ, ayye, sakkoma, bhikkhunisaṅghassa cīvaraṁ dassāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“If we’re able, Venerable, we’ll give robe-cloth to the Sangha of nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena vassaṁvuṭṭhā bhikkhuniyo cīvaraṁ bhājetukāmā sannipatiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Just then the nuns who had completed the rainy-season residence had gathered to distribute robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī tā bhikkhuniyo etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But Thullanandā said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgametha, ayye, atthi bhikkhunisaṅghassa cīvarapaccāsā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please wait, Venerables. The Sangha is expecting more cloth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gacchāyye, taṁ cīvaraṁ jānāhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Go and find out what’s happening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī yena taṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te manusse etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She then went to that family and said to them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“dethāvuso, bhikkhunisaṅghassa cīvaran”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please give the robe-cloth to the Sangha of nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na mayaṁ, ayye, sakkoma bhikkhunisaṅghassa cīvaraṁ dātun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We’re sorry, but we’re not able to give robe-cloth to the Sangha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā told the nuns what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā dubbalacīvarapaccāsāya cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmessatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā allow the robe season to expire because of an uncertain expectation of robe-cloth?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī dubbalacīvarapaccāsāya cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmetī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī dubbalacīvarapaccāsāya cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmessati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī dubbalacīvarapaccāsāya cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun lets the robe season expire because of an uncertain expectation of robe-cloth, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbalacīvarapaccāsā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">An uncertain expectation of robe-cloth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sace mayaṁ sakkoma, dassāma karissāmā”ti vācā bhinnā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">they have said, “If we’re able, then we’ll give, then we’ll act.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvarakālasamayo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Robe season: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthate kathine vassānassa pacchimo māso, atthate kathine pañca māsā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for one who has not participated in the robe-making procedure, it is the last month of the rainy season; for one who has participated in the robe-making procedure, it is the five month period. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lets the robe season expire: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anatthate kathine vassānassa pacchimaṁ divasaṁ atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for one who has not participated in the robe-making procedure, if she goes beyond the last day of the rainy season, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthate kathine kathinuddhāradivasaṁ atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For one who has participated in the robe-making procedure, if she goes beyond the day on which the robe-making season ends, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbalacīvare dubbalacīvarasaññā cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmeti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an uncertain expectation of robe-cloth, and she perceives it as such, and she lets the robe season expire, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbalacīvare vematikā cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an uncertain expectation of robe-cloth, but she is unsure of it, and she lets the robe season expire, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dubbalacīvare adubbalacīvarasaññā cīvarakālasamayaṁ atikkāmeti, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is an uncertain expectation of robe-cloth, but she does not perceive it as such, and she lets the robe season expire, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adubbalacīvare dubbalacīvarasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not an uncertain expectation of robe-cloth, but she perceives it as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adubbalacīvare vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not an uncertain expectation of robe-cloth, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adubbalacīvare adubbalacīvarasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not an uncertain expectation of robe-cloth, and she does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ānisaṁsaṁ dassetvā nivāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she hinders it after demonstrating a benefit; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The ninth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
