<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc52_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on monasteries </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">52. Bhikkhuakkosanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">52. The training rule on abusing monks </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā vesāliyaṁ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying  in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood near Vesālī, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato upālissa upajjhāyo āyasmā kappitako susāne viharati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Upāli’s preceptor, Venerable Kappita, was staying in a charnel ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ mahattarā bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the leader of the nuns from the group of six had just died. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo taṁ bhikkhuniṁ nīharitvā āyasmato kappitakassa vihārassa avidūre jhāpetvā thūpaṁ katvā gantvā tasmiṁ thūpe rodanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They took her to that charnel ground, cremated her near Venerable Kappita’s dwelling, and made a stupa. They then went there to cry. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā kappitako tena saddena ubbāḷho taṁ thūpaṁ bhinditvā pakiresi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Kappita was disturbed by the noise, and so he demolished the stupa and scattered the rubble. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns from the group of six thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“iminā kappitakena amhākaṁ ayyāya thūpo bhinno, handa naṁ ghātemā”ti mantesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kappita has demolished our Venerable’s stupa; let’s kill him,” and they laid a plan. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatarā bhikkhunī āyasmato upālissa etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A certain nun told Venerable Upāli what was happening, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyasmā upāli āyasmato kappitakassa etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and he in turn told Venerable Kappita. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā kappitako vihārā nikkhamitvā nilīno acchi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Kappita then left his dwelling and went into hiding. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo yenāyasmato kappitakassa vihāro tenupasaṅkamiṁsu;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the nuns from the group of six went to his dwelling </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasaṅkamitvā āyasmato kappitakassa vihāraṁ pāsāṇehi ca leḍḍūhi ca ottharāpetvā, “mato kappitako”ti pakkamiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and crushed it with rocks and lumps of earth. When they thought he was dead, they left. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā kappitako tassā rattiyā accayena pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya vesāliṁ piṇḍāya pāvisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The following morning Venerable Kappita robed up, took his bowl and robe, and entered Vesālī for almsfood. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Addasaṁsu kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo āyasmantaṁ kappitakaṁ piṇḍāya carantaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the nuns from the group of six saw him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">they said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayaṁ kappitako jīvati, ko nu kho amhākaṁ mantaṁ saṁharī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Kappita is alive! Who foiled our plan?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When they heard </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyena kira upālinā amhākaṁ manto saṁhaṭo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it was Venerable Upāli, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tā āyasmantaṁ upāliṁ akkosiṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">they abused him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayaṁ kāsāvaṭo malamajjano nihīnajacco amhākaṁ mantaṁ saṁharissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could this barber, this dirt remover of inferior caste, foil our plan?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo ayyaṁ upāliṁ akkosissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns from the group of six abuse Venerable Upāli?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo upāliṁ akkosantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that those nuns did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo upāliṁ akkosissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns from the group of six do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī bhikkhuṁ akkoseyya vā paribhāseyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun abuses or reviles a monk, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who is fully ordained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkoseyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Abuses: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dasahi vā akkosavatthūhi akkosati etesaṁ vā aññatarena, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she abuses with the ten kinds of abuse or with any one of them, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribhāseyya vāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Reviles: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhayaṁ upadaṁseti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she induces fear, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne upasampannasaññā akkosati vā paribhāsati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is fully ordained, and she perceives him as such, and she abuses or reviles him, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne vematikā akkosati vā paribhāsati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, and she abuses or reviles him, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasampanne anupasampannasaññā akkosati vā paribhāsati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is fully ordained, but she does not perceive him as such, and she abuses or reviles him, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampannaṁ akkosati vā paribhāsati vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she abuses or reviles someone who is not fully ordained, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne upasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not fully ordained, but she perceives him as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not fully ordained, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anupasampanne anupasampannasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he is not fully ordained, and she does not perceive him as such, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthapurekkhārāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is aiming at what is beneficial; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammapurekkhārāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is aiming at giving a teaching; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anusāsanipurekkhārāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is aiming at giving an instruction; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
