<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc28_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">28. Cīvaradānasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">28. The training rule on giving robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī naṭānampi naṭakānampi laṅghakānampi sokajjhāyikānampi kumbhathūṇikānampi samaṇacīvaraṁ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā was giving monastic robes to actors, dancers, acrobats, magicians, and musicians, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mayhaṁ parisati vaṇṇaṁ bhāsathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please praise me in public.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naṭāpi naṭakāpi laṅghakāpi sokajjhāyikāpi kumbhathūṇikāpi thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā parisati vaṇṇaṁ bhāsanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they did: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyā thullanandā bahussutā bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Thullanandā is a learned reciter; she’s confident and skilled at giving teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">detha ayyāya, karotha ayyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Give to her; work for her!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā … tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā agārikassa samaṇacīvaraṁ dassatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Thullanandā give monastic robes to householders?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī agārikassa samaṇacīvaraṁ detī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā does this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī agārikassa samaṇacīvaraṁ dassati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī agārikassa vā paribbājakassa vā paribbājikāya vā samaṇacīvaraṁ dadeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun gives a monastic robe to a householder or a male wanderer or a female wanderer, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agāriko nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribbājako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A male wanderer: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuñca sāmaṇerañca ṭhapetvā yo koci paribbājakasamāpanno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any male wanderer apart from Buddhist monks and novice monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribbājikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A female wanderer: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuniñca sikkhamānañca sāmaṇeriñca ṭhapetvā yā kāci paribbājikasamāpannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any female wanderer apart from Buddhist nuns, trainee nuns, and novice nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇacīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monastic robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kappakataṁ vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a mark has been made is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Deti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she gives it away, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātāpitūnaṁ deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives one to her mother or father; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tāvakālikaṁ deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she lends one out; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
