<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc47_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittāgāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pleasure houses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">47. Āvasathacīvarasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">47. The training rule on monastery robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī āvasathacīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā did not relinquish the monastery robe, but continued using it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññā utuniyo bhikkhuniyo na labhanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other menstruating nuns did not get to use it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā āvasathacīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā not relinquish the monastery robe, but continue using it?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī āvasathacīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī āvasathacīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī āvasathacīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun does not relinquish a monastery robe, but continues to use it, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āvasathacīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monastery robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“utuniyo bhikkhuniyo paribhuñjantū”ti dinnaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is given specifically for the use of menstruating nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissajjitvā paribhuñjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Does not relinquish, but continues to use it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dvetisso rattiyo paribhuñjitvā catutthadivase dhovitvā bhikkhuniyā vā sikkhamānāya vā sāmaṇeriyā vā anissajjitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she uses it for two or three days, washes it on the fourth day, and then uses it again without relinquishing it to a nun or a trainee nun or a novice nun, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissajjite anissajjitasaññā paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, and she perceives that it has not, and she uses it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissajjite vematikā paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, but she is unsure of it, and she uses it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissajjite nissajjitasaññā paribhuñjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, but she perceives that it has, and she uses it, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjite anissajjitasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been relinquished, but she perceives that it has not, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjite vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been relinquished, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjite nissajjitasaññā anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been relinquished, and she perceives that it has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nissajjitvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she relinquishes it and then uses it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">puna pariyāyena paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she uses it again at the next turn; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññā utuniyo bhikkhuniyo na honti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are no other menstruating nuns; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acchinnacīvarikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if her robe has been stolen; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">naṭṭhacīvarikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if her robe has been lost; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sattamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
