<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc26_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naggavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on nakedness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">26. Gaṇacīvarasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">26. The training rule on robes for a group </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā upaṭṭhākakulaṁ thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">a family that was supporting the nun Thullanandā said to her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhunisaṅghassa, ayye, cīvaraṁ dassāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, we’re going to give a robe to the Sangha of nuns.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">She replied, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“tumhe bahukiccā bahukaraṇīyā”ti antarāyaṁ akāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re very busy,” and she created an obstacle for them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena tassa kulassa gharaṁ ḍayhati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the house of that family burned down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā amhākaṁ deyyadhammaṁ antarāyaṁ karissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā create an obstacle for our gift? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubhayenāmha paribāhirā bhogehi ca puññena cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now we have neither possessions nor merit.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā gaṇassa cīvaralābhaṁ antarāyaṁ karissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā create an obstacle for a group to get a robe?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī gaṇassa cīvaralābhaṁ antarāyaṁ akāsī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī gaṇassa cīvaralābhaṁ antarāyaṁ karissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī gaṇassa cīvaralābhaṁ antarāyaṁ kareyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun creates an obstacle for a group to get a robe, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A group: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunisaṅgho vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha of nuns is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3"> A robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">channaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ vikappanupagaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one of the six kinds of robe-cloth, but not smaller than what can be transferred to another. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antarāyaṁ kareyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Creates an obstacle: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṁ ime cīvaraṁ na dadeyyun”ti antarāyaṁ karoti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she creates an obstacle with the thought, “What can be done so that these people don’t give robe-cloth?”, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ parikkhāraṁ antarāyaṁ karoti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she creates an obstacle for another requisite, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sambahulānaṁ bhikkhunīnaṁ vā ekabhikkhuniyā vā anupasampannāya vā cīvaraṁ vā aññaṁ vā parikkhāraṁ antarāyaṁ karoti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she creates an obstacle for a number of nuns or for a single nun or for someone who is not fully ordained to get robe-cloth or another requisite, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ānisaṁsaṁ dassetvā nivāreti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she obstructs them after demonstrating a benefit; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
