<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc32_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tuvaṭṭavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on lying down </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">32. Ekattharaṇatuvaṭṭanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">32. The training rule on lying down on the same sheet </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo dve ekattharaṇapāvuraṇā tuvaṭṭenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">two nuns were lying down on the same sheet and under the same cover. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā vihāracārikaṁ āhiṇḍantā passitvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When people walking about the dwellings saw this, they complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo dve ekattharaṇapāvuraṇā tuvaṭṭessanti, seyyathāpi gihiniyo kāmabhoginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can two nuns lie down on the same sheet and under the same cover? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo dve ekattharaṇapāvuraṇā tuvaṭṭessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo dve ekattharaṇapāvuraṇā tuvaṭṭentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo dve ekattharaṇapāvuraṇā tuvaṭṭessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhuniyo dve ekattharaṇapāvuraṇā tuvaṭṭeyyuṁ, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If two nuns lie down on the same sheet and under the same cover, they commit an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Two: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuniyoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nuns: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannāyo vuccanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">fully ordained is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve ekattharaṇapāvuraṇā tuvaṭṭeyyunti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If two lie down on the same sheet and under the same cover: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">taññeva attharitvā taññeva pārupanti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they spread out just the one and cover themselves with just the one, they commit an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekattharaṇapāvuraṇe ekattharaṇapāvuraṇasaññā tuvaṭṭenti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the same sheet and the same cover, and they perceive them as such, and they lie down, they commit an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekattharaṇapāvuraṇe vematikā tuvaṭṭenti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the same sheet and the same cover, but they are unsure of it, and they lie down, they commit an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekattharaṇapāvuraṇe nānattharaṇapāvuraṇasaññā tuvaṭṭenti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the same sheet and the same cover, but they perceive them as different, and they lie down, they commit an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekattharaṇe nānāpāvuraṇe, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is the same sheet but different covers, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānattharaṇe ekapāvuraṇe, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is different sheets but the same cover, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānattharaṇapāvuraṇe ekattharaṇapāvuraṇasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is different sheets and different covers, but they perceive them as the same, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānattharaṇapāvuraṇe vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is different sheets and different covers, but they are unsure of it, they commit an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nānattharaṇapāvuraṇe nānattharaṇapāvuraṇasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is different sheets and different covers, and they perceive them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vavatthānaṁ dassetvā nipajjanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they make a partition and then lie down; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they are insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikānanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they are the first offenders. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The second training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
