<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc53_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on monasteries </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">53. Gaṇaparibhāsanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">53. The training rule on reviling a group </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī bhaṇḍanakārikā hoti kalahakārikā vivādakārikā bhassakārikā saṅghe adhikaraṇakārikā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Caṇḍakāḷī was quarrelsome and argumentative, and she created legal issues in the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī tassā kamme karīyamāne paṭikkosati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But when a legal procedure was being done against her, the nun Thullanandā objected. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī gāmakaṁ agamāsi kenacideva karaṇīyena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards when Thullanandā went to a village on some business, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhikkhunisaṅgho—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha of nuns </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“thullanandā bhikkhunī pakkantā”ti caṇḍakāḷiṁ bhikkhuniṁ āpattiyā adassane ukkhipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">took the opportunity to eject Caṇḍakāḷī for not recognizing an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī gāmake taṁ karaṇīyaṁ tīretvā punadeva sāvatthiṁ paccāgacchi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When Thullanandā had finished her business, she returned to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṇḍakāḷī bhikkhunī thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā āgacchantiyā neva āsanaṁ paññapesi na pādodakaṁ pādapīṭhaṁ pādakaṭhalikaṁ upanikkhipi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">As she was approaching, Caṇḍakāḷī neither prepared a seat for her, nor set out a foot stool, a foot scraper, or water for washing the feet; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na paccuggantvā pattacīvaraṁ paṭiggahesi na pānīyena āpucchi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and she did not go out to meet her to receive her bowl and robe or to ask whether she wanted water to drink. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī caṇḍakāḷiṁ bhikkhuniṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā asked her </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, ayye, mayi āgacchantiyā neva āsanaṁ paññapesi na pādodakaṁ pādapīṭhaṁ pādakaṭhalikaṁ upanikkhipi;</span></p>
<p class="p3">why she was acting like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na paccuggantvā pattacīvaraṁ paṭiggahesi na pānīyena āpucchī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañhetaṁ, ayye, hoti yathā taṁ anāthāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She replied, “That’s how it is, Venerable, when one doesn’t have a protector.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kissa pana tvaṁ, ayye, anāthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how is it, Venerable, that you don’t have a protector?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Imā maṁ, ayye, bhikkhuniyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“When these nuns knew </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayaṁ anāthā appaññātā, natthi imissā kāci pativattā’ti, āpattiyā adassane ukkhipiṁsū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that no one would speak up for me because I am not esteemed by them and I didn’t have a protector, they ejected me for not recognizing an offense.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bālā etā abyattā etā netā jānanti kammaṁ vā kammadosaṁ vā kammavipattiṁ vā kammasampattiṁ vā”ti, caṇḍīkatā gaṇaṁ paribhāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They are incompetent fools! They don’t understand legal procedures, nor what makes them fail or succeed.” And in a rage she reviled the community. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā caṇḍīkatā gaṇaṁ paribhāsissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā revile the community in a rage?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī caṇḍīkatā gaṇaṁ paribhāsatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī caṇḍīkatā gaṇaṁ paribhāsissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī caṇḍīkatā gaṇaṁ paribhāseyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If an enraged nun reviles a community, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caṇḍīkatā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Enraged: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kodhanā vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">angry is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gaṇo nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A community: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunisaṅgho vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha of nuns is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribhāseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Reviles: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bālā etā abyattā etā netā jānanti kammaṁ vā kammadosaṁ vā kammavipattiṁ vā kammasampattiṁ vā”ti paribhāsati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she reviles them, saying, “They are incompetent fools. They don’t understand legal procedures, nor what makes them fail or succeed,” she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sambahulā bhikkhuniyo vā ekaṁ bhikkhuniṁ vā anupasampannaṁ vā paribhāsati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she reviles several nuns, a single nun, or someone who is not fully ordained, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthapurekkhārāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is aiming at what is beneficial; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammapurekkhārāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is aiming at giving a teaching; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anusāsanipurekkhārāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is aiming at giving an instruction; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The third training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
