<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc46_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittāgāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pleasure houses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">46. Bhojanadānasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">46. The training rule on giving food </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī naṭānampi naṭakānampi laṅghakānampi sokajjhāyikānampi kumbhathūṇikānampi sahatthā khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ deti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā was personally giving food to actors, dancers, acrobats, magicians, and musicians, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“mayhaṁ parisati vaṇṇaṁ bhāsathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please praise me in public.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naṭāpi naṭakāpi laṅghakāpi sokajjhāyikāpi kumbhathūṇikāpi thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā parisati vaṇṇaṁ bhāsanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they did: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ayyā thullanandā bahussutā bhāṇikā visāradā paṭṭā dhammiṁ kathaṁ kātuṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Thullanandā is a learned reciter; she’s confident and skilled at giving teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">detha ayyāya, karotha ayyāyā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Give to her; work for her!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā agārikassa sahatthā khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ dassatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā personally give food to householders?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī agārikassa sahatthā khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ detī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā does this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī agārikassa sahatthā khādanīyaṁ bhojanīyaṁ dassati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī agārikassa vā paribbājakassa vā paribbājikāya vā sahatthā khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā dadeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun personally gives fresh or cooked food to a householder or a male wanderer or a female wanderer, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agāriko nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribbājako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A male wanderer: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuñca sāmaṇerañca ṭhapetvā yo koci paribbājakasamāpanno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any male wanderer apart from Buddhist monks and novice monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paribbājikā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A female wanderer: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuniñca sikkhamānañca sāmaṇeriñca ṭhapetvā yā kāci paribbājikasamāpannā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any female wanderer apart from Buddhist nuns, trainee nuns, and novice nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khādanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fresh food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—</span></p>
<p class="p3">apart from the five cooked foods </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">udakadantaponaṁ ṭhapetvā avasesaṁ khādanīyaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and water and tooth cleaners, the rest is called “fresh food”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhojanīyaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Cooked food: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañca bhojanāni—odano, kummāso, sattu, maccho, maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are five kinds of cooked food: cooked grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyena vā kāyapaṭibaddhena vā nissaggiyena vā deti, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives by body or by what is connected to the body or by releasing, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Udakadantaponaṁ deti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she gives water or tooth cleaners, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dāpeti na deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she does not give, but has it given; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upanikkhipitvā deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives by placing it near the person; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bāhirālepaṁ deti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she gives ointments for external use; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
