<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc48_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittāgāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pleasure houses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">48. Āvasathavihārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">48. The training rule on lodgings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī āvasathaṁ anissajjitvā cārikaṁ pakkāmi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nun Thullanandā went wandering without first relinquishing her lodging. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā āvasatho ḍayhati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards her lodging caught fire. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuniyo evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Some nuns said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handāyye, bhaṇḍakaṁ nīharāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Venerables, let’s remove her things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaccā evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But others replied, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“na mayaṁ, ayye, nīharissāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, let’s not. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ kiñci naṭṭhaṁ sabbaṁ amhe abhiyuñjissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">She’ll just make us responsible for whatever is burnt.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī punadeva taṁ āvasathaṁ paccāgantvā bhikkhuniyo pucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When Thullanandā returned to her lodging, she asked the nuns, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“apāyye, bhaṇḍakaṁ nīharitthā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, I hope you removed my things?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na mayaṁ, ayye, nīharimhā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“No, we didn’t.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Thullanandā bhikkhunī ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thullanandā complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo āvasathe ḍayhamāne bhaṇḍakaṁ na nīharissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nuns not remove the contents when a lodging is burning?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">But the nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā āvasathaṁ anissajjitvā cārikaṁ pakkamissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā go wandering without relinquishing her lodging?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī āvasathaṁ anissajjitvā cārikaṁ pakkamatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī āvasathaṁ anissajjitvā cārikaṁ pakkamissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī āvasathaṁ anissajjitvā cārikaṁ pakkameyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun goes wandering without relinquishing her lodging, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āvasatho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lodging: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kavāṭabaddho vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one with a door is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissajjitvā cārikaṁ pakkameyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Goes wandering without relinquishing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhuniyā vā sikkhamānāya vā sāmaṇeriyā vā anissajjitvā parikkhittassa āvasathassa parikkhepaṁ atikkāmentiyā āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she crosses the boundary of an enclosed lodging without first relinquishing it to a nun, a trainee nun, or a novice nun, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkhittassa āvasathassa upacāraṁ atikkāmentiyā āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she goes beyond the vicinity of an unenclosed lodging, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissajjite anissajjitasaññā pakkamati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, and she perceives that it has not, and she goes, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissajjite vematikā pakkamati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, but she is unsure of it, and she goes, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anissajjite nissajjitasaññā pakkamati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has not been relinquished, but she perceives that it has, and she goes, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akavāṭabaddhaṁ anissajjitvā pakkamati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she does not relinquish a lodging without a door, and then goes, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjite anissajjitasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been relinquished, but she perceives that it has not, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjite vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been relinquished, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjite nissajjitasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it has been relinquished, and she perceives that it has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nissajjitvā pakkamati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she relinquishes it and then goes; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati antarāye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is an obstacle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesitvā na labhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she searches, but is unable to find anyone to relinquish it to; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
