<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc16_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rattandhakāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on the dark of the night </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">16. Anāpucchāabhinisīdanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">16. The training rule on sitting down without asking permission </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī pacchābhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā āsane abhinisīdatipi abhinipajjatipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā visited families after the meal, and she sat down and lay down on the seats without asking permission of the owners. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā thullanandaṁ bhikkhuniṁ hirīyamānā āsane neva abhinisīdanti na abhinipajjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of Thullanandā, the people there had qualms,  neither sitting nor lying down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā pacchābhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā āsane abhinisīdissatipi abhinipajjissatipī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā visit families after the meal, and then sit down and lie down on the seats without asking the owners for permission?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā pacchābhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā āsane abhinisīdissatipi abhinipajjissatipī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā act in this way?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī pacchābhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā āsane abhinisīdatipi abhinipajjatipī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī pacchābhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā āsane abhinisīdissatipi abhinipajjissatipi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā act in this way? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī pacchābhattaṁ kulāni upasaṅkamitvā sāmike anāpucchā āsane abhinisīdeyya vā abhinipajjeyya vā, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun visits families after the meal, and then sits down or lies down on a seat without asking permission of the owners, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pacchābhattaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">After the meal: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">majjhanhike vītivatte yāva atthaṅgate sūriye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when the middle of the day has passed, until sunset. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A family: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri kulāni— khattiyakulaṁ, brāhmaṇakulaṁ, vessakulaṁ, suddakulaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of families: the aristocratic family, the brahmin family, the merchant family, the worker family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upasaṅkamitvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Visits: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tattha gantvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">goes there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmike anāpucchāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without asking permission of the owners: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo tasmiṁ kule manusso sāmiko dātuṁ, taṁ anāpucchā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">not having asked permission of a person in that family who is an owner and who has the authority to give. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A seat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pallaṅkassa okāso vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a place for sitting cross-legged is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinisīdeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sits down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ abhinisīdati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she sits down on that seat, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinipajjeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Lies down: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tasmiṁ abhinipajjati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she lies down on that seat, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite anāpucchitasaññā āsane abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, and she does not perceive that she has, and she sits down or lies down on a seat, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite vematikā āsane abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, but she is unsure of it, and she sits down or lies down on a seat, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite āpucchitasaññā āsane abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, but she perceives that she has, and she sits down or lies down on a seat, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pallaṅkassa anokāse āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not a place for sitting cross-legged, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite anāpucchitasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, but she does not perceive that she has, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite āpucchitasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, and she perceives that she has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpucchā āsane abhinisīdati vā abhinipajjati vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she sits down or lies down after asking permission; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhuvapaññatte,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the seat is permanently put out for her; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chaṭṭhasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sixth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
