<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc94_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chattupāhanavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on sunshades and sandals </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">94. Anāpucchāsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">94. The training rule on not asking permission </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo bhikkhussa purato anāpucchā āsane nisīdanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">nuns sat down on seats in front of a monk without asking permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo bhikkhussa purato anāpucchā āsane nisīdissantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns sit down on seats in front of a monk without asking permission?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo bhikkhussa purato anāpucchā āsane nisīdantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo bhikkhussa purato anāpucchā āsane nisīdissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī bhikkhussa purato anāpucchā āsane nisīdeyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun sits down on a seat in front of a monk without asking permission, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhussa puratoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">In front of a monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampannassa purato.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in front of one who is fully ordained. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without asking permission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anapaloketvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">without getting permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āsane nisīdeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Sits down on a seat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antamaso chamāyapi nisīdati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">even if she sits down on the ground, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite anāpucchitasaññā āsane nisīdati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, and she does not perceive that she has, and she sits down on a seat, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite vematikā āsane nisīdati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, but she is unsure of it, and she sits down on a seat, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpucchite āpucchitasaññā āsane nisīdati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has not asked permission, but she perceives that she has, and she sits down on a seat, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite anāpucchitasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, but she does not perceive that she has, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpucchite āpucchitasaññā, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she has asked permission, and she perceives that she has, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpucchā āsane nisīdati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she sits down on the seat after asking permission; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekādasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eleventh training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
