<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc70_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gabbhinivagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pregnant women </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">70. Dutiyasahajīvinīsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">70. The second training rule on disciples </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena thullanandā bhikkhunī sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā neva vūpakāseti na vūpakāsāpeti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nun Thullanandā gave the full admission to a disciple, but neither took her away nor had her taken away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmiko aggahesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so her husband got hold of her. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma ayyā thullanandā sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā neva vūpakāsessati na vūpakāsāpessati, sāmiko aggahesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Venerable Thullanandā give the full admission to a disciple, and then neither take her away nor have her taken away? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sacāyaṁ bhikkhunī pakkantā assa, na ca sāmiko gaṇheyyā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If this nun had gone away, her husband would not have gotten hold of her.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā neva vūpakāseti na vūpakāsāpeti, sāmiko aggahesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that the nun Thullanandā didn’t do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, thullanandā bhikkhunī sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā neva vūpakāsessati na vūpakāsāpessati, sāmiko aggahesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the nun Thullanandā not do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī sahajīviniṁ vuṭṭhāpetvā neva vūpakāseyya na vūpakāsāpeyya antamaso chappañcayojanānipi, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun gives the full admission to her disciple, and then neither takes her away nor has her taken away, even if just 65 to 80 kilometers, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahajīvinī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Disciple: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhivihārinī vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">student is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vuṭṭhāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gives the full admission: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">upasampādetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">gives the full ordination. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Neva vūpakāseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Neither takes her away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sayaṁ vūpakāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not herself take her away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na vūpakāsāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nor has her taken away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na aññaṁ āṇāpeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">she does not ask anyone else to take her away. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Neva vūpakāsessāmi na vūpakāsāpessāmi antamaso chappañcayojanānipī”ti dhuraṁ nikkhittamatte āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she thinks, “I’ll neither take her away nor have her taken away, even just 65 to 80 kilometers,” then by the mere fact of giving up her duty, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sati antarāye,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is an obstacle; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pariyesitvā dutiyikaṁ bhikkhuniṁ na labhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she searches for a companion nun for her, but cannot find anyone; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpadāsu,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there are dangers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tenth training rule is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gabbhinivaggo sattamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The seventh sub-chapter on pregnant women is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
