<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc55_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ārāmavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on monasteries </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">55. Kulamaccharinīsikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">55. The training rule on being stingy with families </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī sāvatthiyaṁ aññatarissā visikhāya piṇḍāya caramānā yena aññataraṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain nun was walking for almsfood along a street in the same town. She then went to a certain family, where she sat down on the prepared seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te manussā taṁ bhikkhuniṁ bhojetvā etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The people there gave her a meal and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“aññāpi, ayye, bhikkhuniyo āgacchantū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, other nuns may come too.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Then that nun thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo nāgaccheyyun”ti, bhikkhuniyo upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What can I do so that other nuns don’t come?” And she went up to other nuns and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“amukasmiṁ, ayye, okāse vāḷā sunakhā caṇḍo balibaddo cikkhallo okāso.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, in such-and-such a place there are malicious dogs, a temperamental ox, and it’s muddy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mā kho tattha agamitthā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Don’t go there.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatarāpi bhikkhunī tassā visikhāya piṇḍāya caramānā yena taṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Another nun, too, went to that family while walking for almsfood along that street. She sat down on the prepared seat </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te manussā taṁ bhikkhuniṁ bhojetvā etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the people there gave her a meal. They then asked her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa, ayye, bhikkhuniyo na āgacchantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, why don’t the nuns come here?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho sā bhikkhunī tesaṁ manussānaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And she told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized her, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhunī kulaṁ maccharāyissatī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can a nun be stingy with a family?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī kulaṁ maccharāyatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that a nun acted like this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized her … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, bhikkhunī kulaṁ maccharāyissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could a nun act like this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī kulamaccharinī assa, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun is stingy with families, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A family: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri kulāni— khattiyakulaṁ, brāhmaṇakulaṁ, vessakulaṁ, suddakulaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of families: the aristocratic family, the brahmin family, the merchant family, the worker family. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maccharinī assāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is stingy: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathaṁ bhikkhuniyo nāgaccheyyun”ti bhikkhunīnaṁ santike kulassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she thinks, “What can I do so that other nuns don’t come?” and she then speaks disparagingly of the family in the presence of nuns, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kulassa vā santike bhikkhunīnaṁ avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she speaks disparagingly of nuns in the presence of the family, she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kulaṁ na maccharāyantī santaṁyeva ādīnavaṁ ācikkhati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is not being stingy with families, but describes the disadvantages as they are; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pañcamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth training rule is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
