<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pc50_root-pli-ms.j. Pācittiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing confession </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittāgāravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on pleasure houses </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">50. Tiracchānavijjāvācanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">50. The training rule on teaching pointless knowledge </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo tiracchānavijjaṁ vācenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the nuns from the group of six were teaching pointless knowledge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo tiracchānavijjaṁ vācessanti, seyyathāpi gihiniyo kāmabhoginiyo”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns teach pointless knowledge? They are just like householders who indulge in worldly pleasures!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā …pe… tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo tiracchānavijjaṁ vācessantī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six do this?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo tiracchānavijjaṁ vācentī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, those nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo tiracchānavijjaṁ vācessanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī tiracchānavijjaṁ vāceyya, pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun teaches pointless knowledge, she commits an offense entailing confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiracchānavijjā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Pointless knowledge: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yaṁ kiñci bāhirakaṁ anatthasaṁhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whatever is external to the Buddha’s Teaching, not connected with the goal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāceyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Teaches: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">padena vāceti, pade pade āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she teaches by the line, then for every line she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkharāya vāceti, akkharakkharāya āpatti pācittiyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she teaches by the syllable, then for every syllable she commits an offense entailing confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lekhaṁ vāceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she teaches writing; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhāraṇaṁ vāceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she teaches protective verses; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">guttatthāya parittaṁ vāceti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she teaches verses for the purpose of protection; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dasamasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The tenth training rule is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cittāgāravaggo pañcamo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The fifth sub-chapter on pleasure houses is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
